December Global Trends : A Dialogue About the Future With Nongovernment Experts This paper was approved for publication by the National Foreign Intelligence Board under the author- ity of the Director of Central Intelligence. Prepared under the direction of the National Intelligence Council. NIC - December From the Director of Central Intelligence I am pleased to introduce Global Trends , which takes a look at the world over the next years from the perspective of the national security policymaker. This is not a traditional intelligence assessment, depending on classified sources and methods. Rather, it reflects an Intelligence Community fully engaged with outside experts in a constructive dialogue about the future. I want to encourage this lively exchange. From the beginning of this ambitious project in fall , we intended to make GT- an unclassified assessment to be shared with the public. Experts from academia, think-tanks and the corporate world have made major contributions, and their reactions, along with those of other specialists who will see our work for the first time, will strengthen our continuing analysis of the issues covered in GT- . Grappling with the future is necessarily a work in progress that, I believe, should constantly seek new insights while testing and revising old judgments. I hope that GT- will contribute to a growing strategic dialogue in the US Government that will help our country meet the challenges and opportunities ahead. I look forward to your comments. George J. Tenet DI Design Center AI - From the Chairman of the National Intelligence Council: The National Intelligence Council (NIC), a small center of strategic thinking in the US Intelligence Community, launched Global Trends to stimulate US policymakers to think "beyond their inboxes." This work expands the effort of Global Trends , published in under the leadership of my predecessor, Professor Richard Cooper of Harvard. We identify global "drivers" and estimate their impact on the world over the next years demography and natural resources, technology, globalization and governance, likely conflicts and prospects for international cooperation, and the role of the United States. The judgments flow from our best efforts to produce a comprehensive picture of the world in . Analysis will help senior leaders better cope with, for example, the uncertainties involved with the decline of Russia, the emergence of China, or the political, economic and societal dynamics in the Middle East. Global Trends should be seen as a work-in-progress, a flexible framework for thinking about the future that we will update and revise as conditions evolve. As such, we are pleased to share it with the public, confident that the feedback we receive will improve our understanding of the issues we treat. We welcome comments on all aspects of this study. Global Trends is not a traditional intelligence product based on classic intelligence sources, methods and procedures. The National Intelligence Council gave overall direction to the year-long effort, assisted by colleagues from other intelligence agencies and offices. We sought out and drew heavily on experts outside the Intelligence Community to help us both identify the key drivers and assess their impact worldwide. Ultimately, however, the conclusions are our responsibility. The NIC s Vice Chairman, Ellen Laipson, and I want to acknowledge the special contributions of several individuals. Enid Schoettle, my special adviser on the NIC, was a principal drafter and coordinator, and she was ably assisted by retired diplomat Richard Smith. The DCI Environmental and Societal Issues Center, led by Paul Frandano, made extensive, invaluable contributions. John Phillips, Chief Scientist of CIA, Directorate of Science and Technology, offered helpful suggestions. Tom Fingar of the State Department s Bureau of Intelligence and Research made important inputs, as did Ken Knight and Pat Neary of the Defense Intelligence Agency. All the regional and functional National Intelligence Officers (NIOs) identified at the back page of this publication contributed sections and provided insights in their areas of expertise. In the final stages of preparing the full text, Enid Schoettle and NIOs Stuart A. Cohen (with his crack staff), David F. Gordon, and Barry F. Lowenkron performed the critical service of integrating substantive comments and judgments. We are particularly grateful to the Director of Central Intelligence, George Tenet, who encouraged us to take on this ambitious project and provided us with the necessary assistance to bring it to fruition. John Gannon Chairman N A T I O N A L I N T E L L I G E N C E C O U N C I L NIC DI Design Center AI - (U) Note on Process In undertaking this comprehensive analysis, the NIC worked actively with a range of nongovernmental institutions and experts. We began the analysis with two workshops focusing on drivers and alternative futures, as the appendix describes. Subsequently, numerous specialists from academia and the private sector contributed to every aspect of the study, from demo- graphics to developments in science and technology, from the global arms market to implications for the United States. Many of the judgments in this paper derive from our efforts to distill the diverse views expressed at these conferences or related workshops. Major conferences cosponsored by the NIC with other government and private centers in support of Global Trends included: Foreign Reactions to the Revolution in Military Affairs (Georgetown University). Evolution of the Nation-State (University of Maryland). Trends in Democratization (CIA and academic experts). American Economic Power (Industry & Trade Strategies, San Fran- cisco, CA). Transformation of Defense Industries (International Institute for Stra- tegic Studies, London, UK). Alternative Futures in War and Con ict (Defense Intelligence Agency and Naval War College, Newport, RI, and CIA). Out of the Box and Into the Future: A Dialogue Between War ghters and Scientists on Far Future Warfare (Potomac Institute, Arlington, VA). Future Threat Technologies Symposium (MITRE Corporation, McLean, VA). The Global Course of the Information Revolution: Technological Trends (RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA). The Global Course of the Information Revolution: Political, Eco- nomic, and Social Consequences (RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA). The Middle East: The Media, Information Technology, and the Internet (The National Defense University, Fort McNair, Washington, DC). Global Migration Trends and Their Implications for the United States (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, Washington, DC). Alternative Global Futures: - (Department of State/Bureau of Intelligence and Research and CIA s Global Futures Project). In October , the draft report was discussed with outside experts, including Richard Cooper and Joseph Nye (Harvard University), Richard Haass (Brookings Institution), James Steinberg (Markle Foundation), and Jessica Mathews (Carnegie Endowment for International Peace). Their comments and suggestions are incorporated in the report. Daniel Yergin (Cambridge Energy Research Associates) reviewed and commented on the nal draft. (U) Contents Note on Process Overview The Drivers and Trends Key Uncertainties: Technology Will Alter Outcomes Key Challenges to Governance: People Will Decide Discussion Population Trends Divergent Aging Patterns Movement of People Health Natural Resources and Environment Food Water Energy Environment Science and Technology Information Technology Biotechnology Other Technologies The Global Economy Dynamism and Growth Unequal Growth Prospects and Distribution Economic Crises and Resilience National and International Governance Nonstate Actors Criminal Organizations and Networks Changing Communal Identities and Networks Overall Impacts on States International Cooperation Future Con ict Internal Con icts Transnational Terrorism Interstate Con icts Reacting to US Military Superiority Major Regions East and Southeast Asia South Asia Russia and Eurasia Middle East and North Africa Sub-Saharan Africa Europe Canada Latin America Appendix Four Alternative Global Futures (U) Overview Global Trends : A Dialogue About the Future With Nongovernment Experts Over the past months, the National Intelligence Council (NIC), in close collaboration with US Government specialists and a wide range of experts outside the government, has worked to identify major drivers and trends that will shape the world of . The key drivers identi ed are: (l) Demographics. ( ) Natural resources and environment. ( ) Science and technology. ( ) The global economy and globalization. ( ) National and international governance. ( ) Future con ict. ( ) The role of the United States. In examining these drivers, several points should be kept in mind: No single driver or trend will dominate the global future in . Each driver will have varying impacts in different regions and countries. The drivers are not necessarily mutually reinforcing; in some cases, they will work at cross-purposes. Taken together, these drivers and trends intersect to create an integrated pic- ture of the world of , about which we can make projections with vary- ing degrees of con dence and identify some troubling uncertainties of strategic importance to the United States. The Methodology Global Trends provides a exible framework to discuss and debate the future. The methodology is useful for our purposes, although admittedly inexact for the social scientist. Our purpose is to rise above short-term, tac- tical considerations and provide a longer-term, strategic perspective. Judgments about demographic and natural resource trends are based prima- rily on informed extrapolation of existing trends. In contrast, many judg- ments about science and technology, economic growth, globalization, governance, and the nature of con ict represent a distillation of views of experts inside and outside the United States Government. The former are projections about natural phenomena, about which we can have fairly high con dence; the latter are more speculative because they are contingent upon the decisions that societies and governments will make. The drivers we emphasize will have staying power. Some of the trends will persist; others will be less enduring and may change course over the time frame we consider. The major contribution of the National Intelligence Council (NIC), assisted by experts from the Intelligence Community, has been to harness US Government and nongovernmental specialists to identify drivers, to determine which ones matter most, to highlight key uncertainties, and to integrate analysis of these trends into a national security context. The result identifies issues for more rigorous analysis and quantification. Revisiting Global Trends : How Our Assessments Have Changed Over the past four years, we have tested the judgments made in the predecessor, Global Trends , published in . Global Trends was the centerpiece of numerous brie ngs, conferences, and public addresses. Various audiences were energetic in challenging, modifying or con rming our judgments. The lively debate that ensued has expanded our treatment of drivers, altered some projections we made in , and matured our thinking overall which was the essential purpose of this exercise. Global Trends ampli es several drivers identi ed previously, and links them more closely to the trends we now project over the next years. Some of the key changes include: Globalization has emerged as a more powerful driver. GT sees international economic dynamics including developments in the World Trade Organization and the spread of information technol- ogy as having much greater in uence than portrayed in GT . (continued) GT assigns more signi cance to the importance of governance, notably the ability of states to deal with nonstate actors, both good and bad. GT pays attention both to the opportunities for coop- eration between governments and private organizations and to the growing reach of international criminal and terrorist networks. GT includes a more careful examination of the likely role of science and technology as a driver of global developments. In addi- tion to the growing signi cance of information technology, biotech- nology and other technologies carry much more weight in the present assessment. The effect of the United States as the preponderant power is intro- duced in GT . The US role as a global driver has emerged more clearly over the past four years, particularly as many countries debate the impact of US hegemony on their domestic and foreign policies. GT provides a more complete discussion of natural resources including food, water, energy, and the environment. It discusses, for example, the over three billion individuals who will be living in water-stressed regions from North China to Africa and the implica- tions for con ict. The linkage between energy availability, price, and distribution is more thoroughly explored. GT emphasizes interactions among the drivers. For example, we discuss the relationship between S&T, military developments, and the potential for con ict. In the regional sections, GT makes projections about the impact of the spread of information, the growing power of China, and the declining power of Russia. Events and trends in key states and regions over the last four years have led us to revise some projections substantially in GT . GT did not foresee the global nancial crisis of - ; GT takes account of obstacles to economic development in East Asia, though the overall projections remain fairly optimistic. (continued) The Drivers and Trends Demographics World population in will be . billion, up from . billion in the year , and in most countries, people will live longer. Ninety- ve percent of the increase will be in developing countries, nearly all in rapidly expanding urban areas. Where political systems are brittle, the combination of popula- tion growth and urbanization will foster instability. Increasing lifespans will have signi cantly divergent impacts. In the advanced economies and a growing number of emerging market countries declining birthrates and aging will combine to increase health care and pension costs while reducing the relative size of the working population, straining the social contract, and leaving signi cant shortfalls in the size and capacity of the work force. In some developing countries, these same trends will combine to expand the size of the working population and reduce the youth bulge increas- ing the potential for economic growth and political stability. As described in GT , there is still substantial uncertainty regarding whether China can cope with internal political and eco- nomic trends. GT highlights even greater uncertainty over the direction of Beijing s regional policies. Many of the global trends continue to remain negative for the societ- ies and regimes in the Middle East. GT projects at best a cold peace between Israel and its adversaries and sees prospects for potentially destabilizing social changes due to adverse effects of glo- balization and insuf cient attention to reform. The spike in oil reve- nues reinforces the assessment of GT about the rising demand for OPEC oil; these revenues are not likely to be directed primarily at core human resources and social needs. Projections for Sub-Saharan Africa are even more dire than in GT because of the spread of AIDS and the continuing prospects for humanitarian crises, political instability, and military conflicts. Revisiting Global Trends : How Our Assessments Have Changed (continued) Natural Resources and Environment Overall food production will be adequate to feed the world s growing popu- lation, but poor infrastructure and distribution, political instability, and chronic poverty will lead to malnourishment in parts of Sub-Saharan Africa. The potential for famine will persist in countries with repressive govern- ment policies or internal con icts. Despite a percent increase in global energy demand, energy resources will be suf cient to meet demand; the lat- est estimates suggest that percent of the world s available oil and per- cent of its gas remain underground. Although the Persian Gulf region will remain the world s largest single source of oil, the global energy market is likely to encompass two rela- tively distinct patterns of regional distribution: one serving consumers (including the United States) from Atlantic Basin reserves; and the other meeting the needs of primarily Asian customers (increasingly China and India) from Persian Gulf supplies and, to a lesser extent, the Caspian region and Central Asia. In contrast to food and energy, water scarcities and allocation will pose signi cant challenges to governments in the Middle East, Sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia, and northern China. Regional tensions over water will be heightened by . Science and Technology Fifteen years ago, few predicted the profound impact of the revolution in information technology. Looking ahead another years, the world will encounter more quantum leaps in information technology (IT) and in other areas of science and technology. The continuing diffusion of information technology and new applications of biotechnology will be at the crest of the wave. IT will be the major building block for international commerce and for empowering nonstate actors. Most experts agree that the IT revolution represents the most signi cant global transformation since the Industrial Revolution beginning in the mid-eighteenth century. The integration or fusion of continuing revolutions in information technology, biotechnology, materials science, and nanotechnology will generate a dramatic increase in investment in technology, which will fur- ther stimulate innovation within the more advanced countries. Older technologies will continue lateral sidewise development into new markets and applications through , bene ting US allies and adversar- ies around the world who are interested in acquiring early generation bal- listic missile and weapons of mass destruction (WMD) technologies. Biotechnology will drive medical breakthroughs that will enable the world s wealthiest people to improve their health and increase their lon- gevity dramatically. At the same time, genetically modi ed crops will offer the potential to improve nutrition among the world s one billion mal- nourished people. Breakthroughs in materials technology will generate widely available products that are multi-functional, environmentally safe, longer lasting, and easily adapted to particular consumer requirements. Disaffected states, terrorists, proliferators, narcotraf ckers, and organized criminals will take advantage of the new high-speed information environ- ment and other advances in technology to integrate their illegal activities and compound their threat to stability and security around the world. The Global Economy and Globalization The networked global economy will be driven by rapid and largely unre- stricted ows of information, ideas, cultural values, capital, goods and ser- vices, and people: that is, globalization. This globalized economy will be a net contributor to increased political stability in the world in , although its reach and bene ts will not be universal. In contrast to the Industrial Rev- olution, the process of globalization is more compressed. Its evolution will be rocky, marked by chronic nancial volatility and a widening economic divide. The global economy, overall, will return to the high levels of growth reached in the s and early s. Economic growth will be driven by political pressures for higher living standards, improved economic poli- cies, rising foreign trade and investment, the diffusion of information technologies, and an increasingly dynamic private sector. Potential brakes on the global economy such as a sustained nancial crisis or prolonged disruption of energy supplies could undo this optimistic projection. Regions, countries, and groups feeling left behind will face deepening economic stagnation, political instability, and cultural alienation. They will foster political, ethnic, ideological, and religious extremism, along with the violence that often accompanies it. They will force the United States and other developed countries to remain focused on old-world challenges while concentrating on the implications of new-world tech- nologies at the same time. National and International Governance States will continue to be the dominant players on the world stage, but gov- ernments will have less and less control over ows of information, technol- ogy, diseases, migrants, arms, and nancial transactions, whether licit or illicit, across their borders. Nonstate actors ranging from business rms to nonpro t organizations will play increasingly larger roles in both national and international affairs. The quality of governance, both nationally and internationally, will substantially determine how well states and societies cope with these global forces. States with competent governance, including the United States, will adapt government structures to a dramatically changed global environment making them better able to engage with a more interconnected world. The responsibilities of once semiautonomous government agencies increas- ingly will intersect because of the transnational nature of national security priorities and because of the clear requirement for interdisciplinary policy responses. Shaping the complex, fast-moving world of will require reshaping traditional government structures. Effective governance will increasingly be determined by the ability and agility to form partnerships to exploit increased information ows, new technologies, migration, and the in uence of nonstate actors. Most but not all countries that succeed will be representative democracies. States with ineffective and incompetent governance not only will fail to bene t from globalization, but in some instances will spawn con icts at home and abroad, ensuring an even wider gap between regional winners and losers than exists today. Globalization will increase the transparency of government decision-mak- ing, complicating the ability of authoritarian regimes to maintain control, but also complicating the traditional deliberative processes of democracies. Increasing migration will create in uential diasporas, affecting policies, politics and even national identity in many countries. Globalization also will create increasing demands for international cooperation on transna- tional issues, but the response of both states and international organizations will fall short in . Future Con ict The United States will maintain a strong technological edge in IT-driven battle eld awareness and in precision-guided weaponry in . The United States will face three types of threats: Asymmetric threats in which state and nonstate adversaries avoid direct engagements with the US military but devise strategies, tactics, and weap- ons some improved by sidewise technology to minimize US strengths and exploit perceived weaknesses; Strategic WMD threats, including nuclear missile threats, in which (bar- ring signi cant political or economic changes) Russia, China, most likely North Korea, probably Iran, and possibly Iraq have the capability to strike the United States, and the potential for unconventional delivery of WMD by both states or nonstate actors also will grow; and Regional military threats in which a few countries maintain large military forces with a mix of Cold War and post-Cold War concepts and technologies. The risk of war among developed countries will be low. The international community will continue, however, to face con icts around the world, rang- ing from relatively frequent small-scale internal upheavals to less frequent regional interstate wars. The potential for con ict will arise from rivalries in Asia, ranging from India-Pakistan to China-Taiwan, as well as among the antagonists in the Middle East. Their potential lethality will grow, driven by the availability of WMD, longer-range missile delivery systems and other technologies. Internal con icts stemming from religious, ethnic, economic or political disputes will remain at current levels or even increase in number. The United Nations and regional organizations will be called upon to manage such con icts because major states stressed by domestic concerns, per- ceived risk of failure, lack of political will, or tight resources will mini- mize their direct involvement. Export control regimes and sanctions will be less effective because of the diffusion of technology, porous borders, defense industry consolidations, and reliance upon foreign markets to maintain pro tability. Arms and weap- ons technology transfers will be more dif cult to control. Prospects will grow that more sophisticated weaponry, including weapons of mass destruction indigenously produced or externally acquired will get into the hands of state and nonstate belligerents, some hostile to the United States. The likelihood will increase over this period that WMD will be used either against the United States or its forces, facilities, and interests overseas. Role of the United States The United States will continue to be a major force in the world community. US global economic, technological, military, and diplomatic in uence will be unparalleled among nations as well as regional and international organi- zations in . This power not only will ensure America s preeminence, but also will cast the United States as a key driver of the international system. The United States will continue to be identi ed throughout the world as the leading proponent and bene ciary of globalization. US economic actions, even when pursued for such domestic goals as adjusting interest rates, will have a major global impact because of the tighter integration of global mar- kets by . The United States will remain in the vanguard of the technological revolu- tion from information to biotechnology and beyond. Both allies and adversaries will factor continued US military pre-emi- nence in their calculations of national security interests and ambitions. Some states adversaries and allies will try at times to check what they see as American hegemony. Although this posture will not translate into strategic, broad-based and enduring anti-US coalitions, it will lead to tac- tical alignments on speci c policies and demands for a greater role in international political and economic institutions. Diplomacy will be more complicated. Washington will have greater dif - culty harnessing its power to achieve speci c foreign policy goals: the US Government will exercise a smaller and less powerful part of the overall economic and cultural in uence of the United States abroad. In the absence of a clear and overriding national security threat, the United States will have dif culty drawing on its economic prowess to advance its foreign policy agenda. The top priority of the American pri- vate sector, which will be central to maintaining the US economic and technological lead, will be nancial pro tability, not foreign policy objec- tives. The United States also will have greater dif culty building coalitions to support its policy goals, although the international community will often turn to Washington, even if reluctantly, to lead multilateral efforts in real and potential con icts. There will be increasing numbers of important actors on the world stage to challenge and check as well as to reinforce US leadership: coun- tries such as China, Russia, India, Mexico, and Brazil; regional organiza- tions such as the European Union; and a vast array of increasingly powerful multinational corporations and nonpro t organizations with their own interests to defend in the world. Key Uncertainties: Technology Will Alter Outcomes Examining the interaction of these drivers and trends points to some major uncertainties that will only be clari ed as events occur and leaders make policy decisions that cannot be foreseen today. We cite eight transnational and regional issues for which the future, according to our trends analysis, is too tough to call with any con dence or precision. These are high-stakes, national security issues that will require con- tinuous analysis and, in the view of our conferees, periodic policy review in the years ahead. Science and Technology We know that the possibility is greater than ever that the revolution in sci- ence and technology will improve the quality of life. What we know about this revolution is exciting. Advances in science and technology will gener- ate dramatic breakthroughs in agriculture and health and in leap-frog appli- cations, such as universal wireless cellular communications, which already are networking developing countries that never had land-lines. What we do not know about the S&T revolution, however, is staggering. We do not know to what extent technology will bene t, or further disadvantage, disaf- fected national populations, alienated ethnic and religious groups, or the less developed countries. We do not know to what degree lateral or side- wise technology will increase the threat from low technology countries and groups. One certainty is that progression will not be linear. Another is that as future technologies emerge, people will lack full awareness of their wider economic, environmental, cultural, legal, and moral impact or the continuing potential for research and development. Advances in science and technology will pose national security challenges of uncertain character and scale. Increasing reliance on computer networks is making critical US infra- structures more attractive as targets. Computer network operations today offer new options for attacking the United States within its traditional continental sanctuary potentially anonymously and with selective effects. Nevertheless, we do not know how quickly or effectively such adversaries as terrorists or disaffected states will develop the tradecraft to use cyber warfare tools and technology, or, in fact, whether cyber warfare will ever evolve into a decisive combat arm. Rapid advances and diffusion of biotechnology, nanotechnology, and the materials sciences, moreover, will add to the capabilities of our adversar- ies to engage in biological warfare or bio-terrorism. Asymmetric Warfare As noted earlier, most adversaries will recognize the information advantage and military superiority of the United States in . Rather than acquiesce to any potential US military domination, they will try to circumvent or min- imize US strengths and exploit perceived weaknesses. IT-driven globaliza- tion will signi cantly increase interaction among terrorists, narcotraf ckers, weapons proliferators, and organized criminals, who in a networked world will have greater access to information, to technology, to nance, to sophis- ticated deception-and-denial techniques and to each other. Such asymmetric approaches whether undertaken by states or nonstate actors will become the dominant characteristic of most threats to the US homeland. They will be a de ning challenge for US strategy, operations, and force development, and they will require that strategy to maintain focus on traditional, low- technology threats as well as the capacity of potential adversaries to harness elements of proliferating advanced technologies. At the same time, we do not know the extent to which adversaries, state and nonstate, might be in u- enced or deterred by other geopolitical, economic, technological, or diplo- matic factors in . The Global Economy Although the outlook for the global economy appears strong, achieving broad and sustained high levels of global growth will be contingent on avoiding several potential brakes to growth. These include: The US economy suffers a sustained downturn. Given its large trade de cit and low domestic savings, the US economy the most important driver of recent global growth is vulnerable to a loss of international con dence in its growth prospects that could lead to a sharp downturn, which, if long last- ing, would have deleterious economic and policy consequences for the rest of the world. Europe and Japan fail to manage their demographic challenges. European and Japanese populations are aging rapidly, requiring more than million new workers by to maintain current dependency ratios between the working population and retirees. Con icts over social services or immigra- tion policies in major European states could dampen economic growth. China and/or India fail to sustain high growth. China s ambitious goals for reforming its economy will be dif cult to achieve: restructuring state- owned enterprises, cleaning up and transforming the banking system, and cutting the government s employment rolls in half. Growth would slow if these reforms go off-track. Failure by India to implement reforms would prevent it from achieving sustained growth. Emerging market countries fail to reform their financial institutions. Many emerging market countries have not yet undertaken the nancial reforms needed to help them survive the next economic crisis. Absent such reform, a series of future economic crises in emerging market countries probably will dry up the capital ows crucial for high rates of economic growth. Global energy supplies suffer a major disruption. Turbulence in global energy supplies would have a devastating effect. Such a result could be driven by con ict among key energy-producing states, sustained internal instability in two or more major energy-producing states, or major terrorist actions. The Middle East Global trends from demography and natural resources to globalization and governance appear generally negative for the Middle East. Most regimes are change-resistant. Many are buoyed by continuing energy revenues and will not be inclined to make the necessary reforms, including in basic education, to change this unfavorable picture. Linear trend analysis shows little positive change in the region, raising the prospects for increased demographic pressures, social unrest, religious and ideological extremism, and terrorism directed both at the regimes and at their Western supporters. Nonlinear developments such as the sudden rise of a Web-connected opposition, a sharp and sustained economic downturn, or, conversely, the emergence of enlightened leaders committed to good governance might change outcomes in individual countries. Political changes in Iran in the late s are an example of such nonlinear development. China Estimates of developments in China over the next years are fraught with unknowables. Working against China s aspirations to sustain economic growth while preserving its political system is an array of political, social, and economic pressures that will increasingly challenge the regime s legiti- macy, and perhaps its survival. The sweeping structural changes required by China s entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and the broader demands of economic global- ization and the information revolution will generate signi cantly new lev- els and types of social and economic disruption that will only add to an already wide range of domestic and international problems. Nevertheless, China need not be overwhelmed by these problems. China has proven politically resilient, economically dynamic, and increasingly assertive in positioning itself for a leadership role in East Asia. Its long-term military program in particular suggests that Beijing wants to have the capa- bility to achieve its territorial objectives, outmatch its neighbors, and con- strain US power in the region. We do not rule out the introduction of enough political reform by to allow China to adapt to domestic pressure for change and to continue to grow economically. Two conditions, in the view of many specialists, would lead to a major secu- rity challenge for the United States and its allies in the region: a weak, dis- integrating China, or an assertive China willing to use its growing economic wealth and military capabilities to pursue its strategic advantage in the region. These opposite extremes bound a more commonly held view among experts that China will continue to see peace as essential to its economic growth and internal stability. Russia Between now and , Moscow will be challenged even more than today to adjust its expectations for world leadership to its dramatically reduced resources. Whether the country can make the transition in adjusting ends to means remains an open and critical question, according to most experts, as does the question of the character and quality of Russian governance and economic policies. The most likely outcome is a Russia that remains inter- nally weak and institutionally linked to the international system primarily through its permanent seat on the UN Security Council. In this view, whether Russia can adjust to this diminished status in a manner that pre- serves rather than upsets regional stability is also uncertain. The stakes for both Europe and the United States will be high, although neither will have the ability to determine the outcome for Russia in . Russian gover- nance will be the critical factor. Japan The rst uncertainty about Japan is whether it will carry out the structural reforms needed to resume robust economic growth and to slow its decline relative to the rest of East Asia, particularly China. The second uncertainty is whether Japan will alter its security policy to allow Tokyo to maintain a stronger military and more reciprocal relationship with the United States. Experts agree that Japanese governance will be the key driver in determin- ing the outcomes. India Global trends con ict signi cantly in India. The size of its population . billion by and its technologically driven economic growth virtually dictate that India will be a rising regional power. The unevenness of its internal economic growth, with a growing gap between rich and poor, and serious questions about the fractious nature of its politics, all cast doubt on how powerful India will be by . Whatever its degree of power, India s rising ambition will further strain its relations with China, as well as com- plicate its ties with Russia, Japan, and the West and continue its nuclear standoff with Pakistan. Key Challenges to Governance: People Will Decide Global Trends identi es governance as a major driver for the future and assumes that all trends we cite will be in uenced, for good or bad, by decisions of people. The inclusion of the United States as a driver both the US Government as well as US for-pro t and nonpro t organizations is based on the general assumption that the actions of nonstate actors as well as governments will shape global outcomes in the years ahead. An integrated trend analysis suggests at least four related conclusions: National Priorities Will Matter To prosper in the global economy of , governments will have to invest more in technology, in public education, and in broader participa- tion in government to include increasingly in uential nonstate actors. The extent to which governments around the world are doing these things today gives some indication of where they will be in . US Responsibilities Will Cover the World, Old and New The United States and other developed countries will be challenged in to lead the fast-paced technological revolution while, at the same time, maintaining military, diplomatic, and intelligence capabilities to deal with traditional problems and threats from low-technology countries and groups. The United States, as a global power, will have little choice but to engage leading actors and confront problems on both sides of the widening economic and digital divides in the world of , when global- ization s bene ts will be far from global. US Foreign Priorities Will be More Transnational International or multilateral arrangements increasingly will be called upon in to deal with growing transnational problems from economic and nancial volatility; to legal and illegal migration; to competition for scarce natural resources such as water; to humanitarian, refugee, and environmental crises; to terrorism, narcotraf cking, and weapons prolifer- ation; and to both regional con icts and cyber threats. And when interna- tional cooperation or international governance comes up short, the United States and other developed countries will have to broker solutions among a wide array of international players including governments at all levels, multinational corporations, and nonpro t organizations. National Governments Will be More Transparent To deal with a transnational agenda and an interconnected world in , governments will have to develop greater communication and collaboration between national security and domestic policy agencies. Interagency cooper- ation will be essential to understanding transnational threats and to develop- ing interdisciplinary strategies to counter them. Consequence management of a biological warfare (BW) attack, for example, would require close coor- dination among a host of US Government agencies, foreign governments, US state and municipal governments, the military, the medical community, and the media. Discussion Global Trends : A Dialogue About the Future With Nongovernment Experts The international system in will be shaped by seven global drivers and related trends: population; natural resources and the environment; science and technology; the glo- bal economy and globalization; national and international governance; the nature of con ict; and the role of the United States. These trends will in uence the capacities, priorities, and behavior of states and societies and thus substantially de ne the international security environment. Population Trends The world in will be populated by some . billion people, up from . billion in the year . The rate of world population growth, however, will have diminished from . percent annually in , to . percent today, to approximately percent in . Increased life expectancy and falling fertility rates will contribute to a shift toward an aging population in high-income developed countries. Beyond that, demographic trends will sharply diverge. More than percent of the increase in world population will be found in developing countries, nearly all in rapidly expanding urban areas. India s population will grow from mil- lion to more than . billion by ; Paki- stan s probably will swell from million now to about million. Some countries in Africa with high rates of AIDS will experience reduced population growth or even declining populations despite relatively high birthrates. In South Africa, for example, the population is projected to drop from . million in to . million in . Russia and many post-Communist countries of Eastern Europe will have declining popula- tions. As a result of high mortality and low birthrates, Russia s population may drop from its current million to as low as to million in , while the neighboring states of Central Asia will experience continued popula- tion growth. In Japan and West European coun- tries such as Italy and Spain, populations also will decline in the absence of dramatic increases in birthrates or immigration. North America, Australia, and New Zealand the traditional magnets for migrants will continue to have the highest rates of population growth among the devel- oped countries, with annual population growth rates between . percent and . percent. Divergent Aging Patterns In developed countries and many of the more advanced developing countries, the declining ratio of working people to retirees will strain social services, pensions, and health systems. Governments will seek to mitigate the problem through such measures as delaying retirement, encouraging greater participation in the work Los Angeles , , , , , , Dhaka , , , , , Mexico City , , , , , , New York , , , , , , Sao Paulo , , , , , , Buenos Aires , , , , , , Lagos , , , , , , Cairo , , , , , , Karachi , , , , , , Mumbai , , , , , , Calcutta , , , , , , Jakarta , , , , , , Shanghai , , , , , , Tokyo , , , , , , Beijing , , , , , , Boundary representation is no necessarily authoritative. DI Cartography Center AI - Growth in Megacitiesa > million - million - million < million Population Growth, - aCities containing more than million inhabitants. Sources: The National Geographic Society and United Nations. (estimate) (projection) Population Growth of Largest Cities I N D I I N D I A N A N O C E O C E A N A N N O R T H N O R T H A T L A T L A N T I C A N T I C O C E O C E A N A N SOUTH SOUTH ATLANTIC TLANTIC OCEAN OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N I N D I A N O C E A N N O R T H A T L A N T I C O C E A N SOUTH ATLANTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N Nearly one-half of the world s land surface consists of river basins shared by more than one country, and more than nations receive more than one-third of their water from outside their borders. Turkey is building new dams and irrigation projects on the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers, which will affect water ows into Syria and Iraq two countries that will experience con- siderable population growth. Egypt is proceeding with a major diversion of water from the Nile, which ows from Ethio- pia and Sudan, both of which will want to draw more water from the Nile for their own development by . Water-sharing arrange- ments are likely to become more contentious. Water shortages occurring in combination with other sources of tension such as in the Middle East will be the most worrisome. Energy The global economy will continue to become more energy ef cient through . Traditional industries, as well as transportation, are increasingly ef cient in their energy use. More- over, the most dynamic growth areas in the glo- bal economy, especially services and the knowledge elds, are less energy intensive than the economic activities that they replace. Energy production also is becoming more ef - cient. Technological applications, particularly in deep-water exploration and production, are opening remote and hostile areas to petroleum production. Sustained global economic growth, along with population increases, will drive a nearly per- cent increase in the demand for energy over the next years. Total oil demand will increase from roughly million barrels per day in to more than million barrels in , an increase almost as large as OPEC s current pro- duction. Over the next years, natural gas usage will increase more rapidly than that of any other energy source by more than percent mainly stemming from the tripling of gas consumption in Asia. Asia will drive the expansion in energy demand, replacing North America as the lead- ing energy consumption region and accounting for more than half of the world s total increase in demand. China, and to a lesser extent India, will see especially dramatic increases in energy con- sumption. By , only one-tenth of Persian Gulf oil will be directed to Western markets; three- quarters will go to Asia. Fossil fuels will remain the dominant form of energy despite increasing concerns about glo- bal warming. Ef ciency of solar cells will improve, genetic engineering will increase the long-term prospects for the large-scale use of ethanol, and hydrates will be used increasingly as fuels. Nuclear energy use will remain at cur- rent levels. Meeting the increase in demand for energy will pose neither a major supply challenge nor lead to substantial price increases in real terms. Estimates of the world s total endowment of oil have steadily increased as technological progress in extracting oil from remote sources has enabled new discoveries and more ef cient production. Recent estimates indicate that percent of the world s available oil still remains in the ground, as does percent of the world s natural gas. DI Cartography Center AI - World Water Availability Estimate More than - very high to - high to - average to - low to - very low Less than - catastrophically low No data Water Availability ( , m /year per capita) Source: Stockholm Environmental Institute, : Comprehensive Assessment of the Freshwater Resources of the World. Environment Contemporary environmental problems will persist and in many instances grow over the next years. With increasingly intensive land use, signi cant degradation of arable land will continue as will the loss of tropical forests. Given the promising global economic outlook, greenhouse gas emissions will increase sub- stantially. The depletion of tropical forests and other species-rich habitats, such as wetlands and coral reefs, will exacerbate the historically large losses of biological species now occur- ring. Environmental issues will become main- stream issues in several countries, particu- larly in the developed world. The consensus on the need to deal with environmental issues will strengthen; however, progress in dealing with them will be uneven. The outlook to is mixed for such localized environmental problems as high concentrations of ozone and noxious chemicals in the air and the pollution of rivers and lakes by industrial and agricultural wastes. Developed countries will continue to manage these local environmental issues, and such issues are unlikely to constitute a major con- straint on economic growth or on improving health standards. The developing countries, however, will face intensi ed environmental problems as a result of population growth, economic develop- ment, and rapid urbanization. An increasing number of cities will face the serious air and water quality problems that already are trou- bling in such urban centers as Mexico City, Sao Paulo, Lagos, and Beijing. Russia and Ukraine will struggle with prob- lems stemming from decades of environmen- tal neglect and abuse, including widespread radioactive pollution from badly managed nuclear facilities. These problems are unlikely to be adequately addressed. As these countries pursue economic growth, they will devote insuf cient resources to environmen- tal remediation. Central and Eastern European countries face similar problems as a result of the legacy of environmental neglect from the Communist era; nevertheless, driven by their desire to gain EU membership, several will become more effective in addressing these problems and will upgrade their environmental standards. Some existing agreements, even when imple- mented, will not be able by to reverse the targeted environmental damage they were designed to address. The Montreal Protocol is on track to restore the stratospheric ozone layer over the next years. Nevertheless, the sea- sonal Antarctic ozone hole will expand for the next two decades increasing the risk of skin cancer in countries like Australia, Argentina, and Chile because of the long lag time between emission reductions and atmospheric effects. Important new agreements will be implemented, including, for example, a global treaty to control the worldwide spread of such persistent organic chemicals as DDT and dioxins. Other agreements, such as the Convention on Biodiversity, will fall short in meeting their objectives. Over the next years the pressures on the environment as a result of economic growth will decrease as a result of less energy-inten- sive economic development and technological advances. For example, increased use of fuel cells and hybrid engines is likely to reduce the rate of increase in the amount of pollution pro- duced, particularly in the transportation sector. Also, increases in the utilization of solar and wind power, advances in the ef ciency of energy use, and a shift toward less polluting fuels, such as natural gas, will contribute to this trend. Global warming will challenge the interna- tional community as indications of a warming climate such as meltbacks of polar ice, sea level rise, and increasing frequency of major storms occur. The Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change, which mandates emission-reduction targets for developed countries, is unlikely to come into force soon or without substantial modi cation. Even in the absence of a formal treaty, however, some incremental progress will be made in reducing the growth of greenhouse gas emissions. Both India and China will actively explore less carbon-intensive development strategies, although they will resist setting targets or timetables for carbon dioxide emission limits. A number of major rms operating interna- tionally will take steps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Science and Technology The continuing diffusion of information tech- nology and new applications in the biotechnol- ogy eld will be of particular global signi cance. Two major trends will continue: The integration of existing disciplines to form new ones. The integration of informa- tion technology, biotechnology, materials sci- ences, and nanotechnology will generate a dramatic increase in innovation. The effects will be profound on business and commerce, public health, and safety. The lateral development of technology. Older established technologies will continue sidewise development into new markets and applications, for example, developing innovative applications for old computer chips. The time between the discovery and the appli- cation of scienti c advances will continue to shorten. Developments in the laboratory will reach commercial production at ever faster rates, leading to increased investments. Information Technology (IT) Over the next years, a wide range of devel- opments will lead to many new IT-enabled devices and services. Rapid diffusion is likely because equipment costs will decrease at the same time that demand is increasing. Local-to- global Internet access holds the prospect of uni- versal wireless connectivity via hand-held devices and large numbers of low-cost, low- altitude satellites. Satellite systems and services will develop in ways that increase performance and reduce costs. By , information technology will make major inroads in rural as well as urban areas around the globe. Moreover, information tech- nology need not be widespread to produce important effects. The rst information tech- nology pioneers in each society will be the local economic and political elites, multiplying the initial impact. Some countries and populations, however, will fail to bene t much from the information revolution. Among developing countries, India will remain in the forefront in developing infor- mation technology, led by the growing class of high-tech workers and entrepreneurs. China will lead the developing world in utilizing information technology, with urban areas leading the countryside. Beijing s capacity to control or shape the content of information, however, is likely to be sharply reduced. Although most Russian urban-dwellers will adopt information technologies well before , the adoption of such technologies will be slow in the broader population. Latin America s Internet market will grow exponentially. Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil will accrue the greatest bene ts because of larger telecommunications companies, bigger markets, and more international investment. In Sub-Saharan Africa, South Africa is best positioned to make relatively rapid progress in IT. Societies with advanced communications gen- erally will worry about threats to individual pri- vacy. Others will worry about the spread of cultural contamination. Governments every- where will be simultaneously asked to foster the diffusion of IT while controlling its harm- ful effects. Biotechnology By , the biotechnology revolution will be in full swing with major achievements in com- bating disease, increasing food production, reducing pollution, and enhancing the quality of life. Many of these developments, especially in the medical eld, will remain costly through and will be available mainly in the West and to wealthy segments of other societies. Some biotechnologies will continue to be con- troversial for moral and religious reasons. Among the most signi cant developments by are: Genomic pro ling by decoding the genetic basis for pathology will enable the medical community to move beyond the description of diseases to more effective mechanisms for diagnosis and treatment. Biomedical engineering, exploiting advances in biotechnology and smart materials, will produce new surgical procedures and sys- tems, including better organic and arti cial replacement parts for human beings, and the use of unspecialized human cells (stem cells) to augment or replace brain or body functions and structures. It also will spur development of sensor and neural prosthetics such as reti- nal implants for the eye, cochlear implants for the ear, or bypasses of spinal and other nerve damage. Therapy and drug developments will cure some enduring diseases and counter trends in antibiotic resistance. Deeper understanding of how particular diseases affect people with speci c genetic characteristics will facilitate the development and prescription of custom drugs. Genetic modi cation despite continuing technological and cultural barriers will improve the engineering of organisms to increase food production and quality, broaden the scale of bio-manufacturing, and provide cures for certain genetic diseases. Cloning will be used for such applications as livestock production. Despite cultural and political concerns, the use of genetically modi ed crops has great potential to dramatically improve the nutrition and health of many of the world s poorest people. DNA identi cation will continue to improve law enforcement capabilities. Other Technologies Breakthroughs in materials technology will generate widely available products that are smart, multifunctional, environmentally compatible, more survivable, and customizable. These products not only will contribute to the growing information and biotechnology revolutions but also will bene t manufacturing, logistics, and personal lifestyles. Materials with active capabilities will be used to combine sensing and actuation in response to environ- mental conditions. Discoveries in nanotechnology will lead to unprecedented understanding and control over the fundamental building blocks of all physical things. Developments in this emerging eld are likely to change the way almost everything from vaccines to computers to automobile tires to objects not yet imagined is designed and made. Self-assembled nanomaterials, such as semiconductor quantum dots, could by revolutionize chemical labeling and enable rapid processing for drug discovery, blood con- tent analysis, genetic analysis, and other bio- logical applications. The Global Economy The global economy is well-positioned to achieve a sustained period of dynamism through . Global economic growth will return to the high levels reached in the s and early s, the nal years of the post- World War II long boom. Dynamism will be strongest among so-called emerging mar- kets especially in the two Asian giants, China and India but will be broadly based worldwide, including in both industrialized and many developing countries. The rising tide of the global economy will create many economic winners, but it will not lift all boats. The infor- mation revolution will make the persistence of poverty more visible, and regional differences will remain large. Dynamism and Growth Five factors will combine to promote wide- spread economic dynamism and growth: Political pressures for higher living standards. The growing global middle class now bil- lion strong is creating a cycle of rising aspira- tions, with increased information ows and the spread of democracy giving political clout to formerly disenfranchised citizens. Improved macroeconomic policies. The wide- spread improvement in recent years in eco- nomic policy and management sets the stage for future dynamism. In ation rates have been dramatically lowered across a wide range of economies. The abandonment of unsustainable xed exchange rate regimes in Asia and the creation of the European Monetary Union (EMU) will contribute to economic growth. Rising trade and investment. International trade and investment ows will grow, spurring rapid increases in world GDP. Opposition to further trade liberalization from special interest groups and some governments will not erode the basic trend toward expansion of trade. Inter- national capital ows, which have risen dramat- ically in the past decade, will remain plentiful, especially for emerging market countries that increase their transparency. Diffusion of information technology. The per- vasive incorporation of information technolo- gies will continue to produce signi cant ef ciency gains in the US economy. Similar gains will be witnessed albeit in varying degrees in numerous other countries as the integration of these technologies proceeds. But the absorption of IT and its bene ts will not be automatic because many countries will fail to meet the conditions needed for effective IT uti- lization high educational levels, adequate infrastructure, and appropriate regulatory poli- cies. Increasingly dynamic private sectors. Rapid expansion of the private sector in many emerg- ing market countries along with deregulation and privatization in Europe and Japan will spur economic growth by generating competitive pressures to use resources more ef ciently. The impact of improved ef ciencies will be multiplied as the information revolution enhances the ability of rms around the world to learn best practices from the most success- ful enterprises. Indeed, the world may be on the verge of a rapid convergence in market-based nancial and business practices. Unequal Growth Prospects and Distribution The countries and regions most at risk of falling behind economically are those with endemic internal and/or regional con icts and those that fail to diversify their economies. The econo- mies of most states in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East and some in Latin America will continue to suffer. A large segment of the Eurasian landmass extending from Central Asia through the Caucasus to parts of southeastern Europe faces dim economic prospects. Within countries, the gap in the standard of living also will increase. Even in rapidly growing coun- tries, large regions will be left behind. Emerging Asia will be the fastest growing region, led by breakout candidates China and India, whose economies already comprise roughly one-sixth of global GDP. To the degree that China implements reforms mandated by its entry into the World Trade Organization, its economy will become more efficient, enabling rapid growth to continue. China s economic development, however, will be mainly in the dynamic coastal provinces. Agricultural prov- inces in northern and western China will lag behind, causing social tensions that Beijing will be challenged to manage. India s relatively strong educational system, democracy, and English-language skills position it well to take advantage of gains related to information technology. India nevertheless faces enormous challenges in spreading the benefits of growth to hundreds of millions of impoverished, often illit- erate citizens, particularly in the northern states. In Europe and Japan, the picture is mixed. Western Europe is likely to narrow what has been a growing economic performance gap with the United States, and Eastern European countries, eager for EU membership, generally will adopt reform policies and grow apace. South-Eastern Europe will improve economic prospects only gradually as it improves regional security. Although Japan s economic performance in the next years will be stronger than that of the s, its relative importance in the global economy will decrease. Economic prospects for Russia and Eurasia are not promising. Latin America will manage fairly rapid aggre- gate growth, but it will be spread unevenly across the region. The market-oriented democracies in Mexico and the southern cone will lead the way. A new generation of entre- preneurs will be inclined to favor additional market openings, but the bene ts may further distort income distribution, already the most inequitable in the world. Elsewhere, the Andean region will struggle with a poorly educated labor force, unstable governance, and dependence upon commodities such as oil, cop- per, and narcotics. The Middle East and North Africa will be marked by increasing internal differentiation as some countries respond more effectively to the challenges of globalization or to the uncertain- ties of closer integration with the EU while oth- ers lag. In Sub-Saharan Africa, persistent con icts and instability, autocratic and corrupt governments, overdependence on commodities with declining real prices, low levels of educa- tion, and widespread infectious diseases will combine to prevent most countries from experi- encing rapid economic growth. Economic Crises and Resilience The global economy will be prone to periodic nancial crises, but its capacity to correct itself will remain strong. The rapid rebound from the global nancial crisis of - , the limited impact of the recent tripling of oil prices on global economic growth, and the successful management of the Y K problem are the most recent manifestations of resilience. None- theless, economic liberalization and globaliza- tion entail risks and inevitably will create bumps in the road, some of them potentially highly disruptive. Economic crises will recur. The trends toward free markets and deregulation will allow nancial markets to overshoot, increase the possibility for sudden reversal in senti- ment, and expose individual countries to broad swings in the global market. Any of these could trigger a nancial crisis. Turbulence in one economy will affect oth- ers. Increased trade links and the integration of global nancial markets will quickly trans- mit turmoil in one economy regionally and internationally, as Russia s nancial turmoil in affected Brazil. Disputes over international economic rules. The Asian nancial crisis revealed differ- ences among countries regarding global nancial architecture. As emerging market countries continue to grow, they will seek a stronger voice in setting the terms of interna- tional economic governance. A lack of con- sensus could at times make nancial markets skittish and undermine growth. National and International Governance The state will remain the single most important organizing unit of political, economic, and security affairs through but will confront fundamental tests of effective governance. The rst will be to bene t from, while coping with, several facets of globalization. The second will be to deal with increasingly vocal and orga- nized publics. The elements of globalization greater and freer ow of information, capital, goods, ser- vices, people, and the diffusion of power to nonstate actors of all kinds will challenge the authority of virtually all governments. At the same time, globalization will create demands for increased international coopera- tion on transnational issues. The Role of Education Education will be determinative of success in at both the individual and country levels. The globalizing economy and tech- nological change inevitably place an increasing premium on a more highly skilled labor force. Adult literacy and school enrollments will increase in almost all countries. The educational gender gap will narrow and probably will disappear in East and Southeast Asia and Latin America. Progress will vary among regions, coun- tries, and social groups, triggering increased income inequalities within as well as among countries. School enrollments will decline in the most highly impoverished countries, in those affected by serious internal con- icts, and in those with high rates of infectious diseases. Alternative Trajectories Although the outlook for the global economy appears quite strong, achieving sustained high levels of global growth will be contin- gent on avoiding several potential brakes to growth. Five are described below. The US economy suffers a sustained down- turn. Given the large trade deficit and low domestic savings, the US economy the most important driver of recent global growth is vulnerable to loss of international confidence in its growth prospects that could lead to a sharp downturn, which, if long-lasting, would have deleterious economic and policy conse- quences for the rest of the world. Key trading partners would suffer as the world s largest market contracted, and international finan- cial markets might face profound instability. Europe and Japan fail to manage their demographic challenges. European and Jap- anese populations are aging rapidly, requir- ing more than million new workers by to maintain current dependency ratios between the working population and retirees. For these countries, immigration is a contro- versial means of meeting these labor force requirements. Conflicts over the social con- tract or immigration policies in major Euro- pean states could dampen economic growth. Japan faces an even more serious labor force shortage and its strategies for responding enticing overseas Japanese to return, broad- ening the opportunities for women, and increasing investments elsewhere in Asia may prove inadequate. If growth in Europe and Japan falters, the economic burden on the US economy would increase, weakening the overall global outlook. China and/or India fail to sustain high growth. China s ambitious goals for reform- ing its economy will be dif cult to realize: restructuring state-owned enterprises, clean- ing up and transforming the banking system, cutting the government s employment rolls in half, and opening up the economy to greater foreign competition. Growth would slow if these reforms go awry, which, in turn, would exacerbate bureaucratic wrangling and increase opposition to the reform agenda. India s reform drive essential to sustained economic growth could be sidetracked by social divisions and by the bureaucratic cul- ture of the public service. Emerging market countries fail to reform their nancial institutions. Although most emerging market countries bounced back from the - nancial crisis more quickly than expected, many have not yet undertaken the nancial reforms needed to help them survive the next economic crisis. Absent such reform, a series of future eco- nomic crises in emerging market countries could dry up the capital ows crucial for high rates of economic growth. Global energy supplies are disrupted in a major way. Although the world economy is less vulnerable to energy price swings than in the s, a major disruption in global energy supplies still would have a devastat- ing effect. Con ict among key energy-pro- ducing states, sustained internal instability in two or more major energy-producing states, or major terrorist actions could lead to such a disruption. All states will confront popular demands for greater participation in politics and attention to civil rights pressures that will encourage greater democratization and transparency. Twenty- ve years ago less than a third of states were de ned as democracies by Free- dom House; today more than half of states are considered democracies, albeit with varying combinations of electoral and civil or politi- cal rights. The majority of states are likely to remain democracies in some sense over the next years, but the number of new democ- racies that are likely to develop is uncertain. Successful states will interact with nonstate actors to manage authority and share responsi- bility. Between now and , three important challenges for states will be: Managing relations with nonstate actors; Combating criminal networks; and Responding to emerging and dynamic reli- gious and ethnic groups. Nonstate Actors States continually will be dealing with private- sector organizations both for-pro t and non- pro t. These nonstate actors increasingly will gain resources and power over the next years as a result of the ongoing liberalization of glo- bal nance and trade, as well as the opportuni- ties afforded by information technology. The For-pro t Sector. The for-pro t business sector will grow rapidly over the next years, spearheading legal and judicial reform and challenging governments to become more transparent and predictable. At the same time, governments will be challenged to monitor and regulate business rms through measures con- sistent with local standards of social welfare. Multinational corporations now numbering more than , with nearly one-half million af liates have multiplied in recent years as governments have deregulated their economies, privatized state-owned enterprises, and liberal- ized nancial markets and trade. This trend will continue. Medium-sized, mostly local rms will multiply in many countries, driven by the shift away from Communism and other socialist models and the broadening of nancial services and banking systems. Micro-enterprises also will multiply, not only because of deregulation and liberalization, but also because many states will have a declining capacity to stymie small-scale commercial activities. As medium-sized and small businesses become more numerous, they will encourage, and then link into, various glo- bal networks. The Nonpro t Sector. Nonpro t networks with af liates in more than one country will grow through , having expanded more than - fold between and . Within individual countries, the nonpro t sector also will expand rapidly. Over the next years international and national nonpro ts will not only expand but change in signi cant ways. Nonpro t organizations will have more resources to expand their activities and will become more con dent of their power and more confrontational. Nonpro ts will move beyond delivering services to the design and implementation of policies, whether as part- ners or competitors with corporations and governments. Western preponderance will persist but at a declining level as economic growth in Asia and Latin America produces additional resources for support of civil society. In addi- tion, autocratic governments and Islamic states or groups will increasingly support nonpro t groups sympathetic to their interests. Nonpro t organizations will be expected to meet codes of conduct. Governments and cor- porations which are increasingly held to standards of transparency and accountabil- ity will, in turn, expect nonpro ts to meet similar standards. Criminal Organizations and Networks Over the next years, transnational criminal organizations will become increasingly adept at exploiting the global diffusion of sophisticated information, nancial, and transportation networks. Criminal organizations and networks based in North America, Western Europe, China, Colombia, Israel, Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, and Russia will expand the scale and scope of their activities. They will form loose alliances with one another, with smaller criminal entrepre- neurs, and with insurgent movements for spe- ci c operations. They will corrupt leaders of unstable, economically fragile or failing states, insinuate themselves into troubled banks and businesses, and cooperate with insurgent politi- cal movements to control substantial geo- graphic areas. Their income will come from narcotics traf cking; alien smuggling; traf ck- ing in women and children; smuggling toxic materials, hazardous wastes, illicit arms, mili- tary technologies, and other contraband; nan- cial fraud; and racketeering. The risk will increase that organized criminal groups will traf c in nuclear, biological, or chemical weapons. The degree of risk depends on whether governments with WMD capabilities can or will control such weapons and materials. Changing Communal Identities and Networks Traditional communal groups whether reli- gious or ethnic-linguistic groups will pose a range of challenges for governance. Using opportunities afforded by globalization and the opening of civil society, communal groups will be better positioned to mobilize coreligionists or ethnic kin to assert their interests or defend against perceived economic or political dis- crimination. Ethnic diasporas and coreligionists abroad also will be more able and willing to provide fraternal groups with political, nan- cial, and other support. The Role of the Nonpro t Sector Nonpro t organizations deliver critical services to individuals and private groups, with percent of nonpro t activities in health, education, and social services alone. They provide information and expertise, advocate policies on behalf of their interests, and work through interna- tional organizations, both as implement- ing partners and as advocates. In many development projects and humanitarian emergencies, nonpro ts will continue to deliver most of the aid from governments and international organizations. DI Cartography Center AI - Source: US Government Cocaine Heroin Illegal migrants Women and children Trafficking Flows Growing Areas Coca Opium poppy Current World Illicit Trafficking Boundary representation is no necessarily authoritative. I N D I A N O C E A N N O R T H A T L A N T I C O C E A N SOUTH ATLANTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N discriminate against communal minorities. Such conditions will foment ethnic tensions in Sub-Saharan Africa, Central and South Asia, and parts of the Middle East, often in rapidly growing urban areas. Certain power- ful states such as Russia, China, Brazil, and India also are likely to repress politicized communal minorities. Religious, often fused with ethnic, griev- ances. Few Muslim states will grant full political and cultural rights to religious minorities. At the same time, they will not remain indifferent to the treatment of Muslim minorities elsewhere: in Russia, Indonesia, India/Kashmir, China, and the Balkans. Other religious denominations also will support beleaguered coreligionists. Resistance to migration. Some relatively homogenous countries or sub-regions in Asia and Europe will resist ethnically diverse migrants, creating tensions. Indigenous protest movements. Such move- ments will increase, facilitated by transna- tional networks of indigenous rights activists and supported by well-funded international human rights and environmental groups. Tensions will intensify in the area from Mexico through the Amazon region; north- eastern India; and the Malaysian-Indonesian archipelago. Overall Impact on States The developed democracies will be best posi- tioned for good governance because they will tend to empower legitimate nonstate actors in both the for-pro t and nonpro t sectors; will favor institutions and processes that accommo- date divergent communal groups; will press for transparency in government and the ef cient delivery of public services; and will maintain institutions to regulate legitimate for-pro t and nonpro t organizations and control illegitimate criminal groups. Countries in Western Europe, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and Japan have the requisite agility and institutions to meet the challenges. Countries in Eastern Europe as well as Turkey, South Korea, India, Chile, and Brazil, among other developing countries, are moving in these directions, despite some continuing obstacles. Some newly democratic states and modernizing authoritarian states will have leaders amenable to technological change and access to substan- tial human and nancial resources. They will encourage business rms, nonpro ts, and com- munal groups supportive of the government and discourage or suppress those that are indepen- dent-minded or critical of government policies. They will have some success in coping with the energy, ideas, and resources of nonstate actors. Several Asian countries, such as Singapore, Taiwan, and perhaps China, as well as some states in the Middle East and Latin America are likely to take this approach. Other states in varying degrees will lack the resources and leadership to achieve effective governance. Most autocratic states in the Mid- dle East and Africa will not have the institu- tions or cultural orientation to exploit the opportunities provided by nonstate actors apart from certain forms of humanitarian assis- tance. In many of these countries, nonstate actors will become more important than gov- ernments in providing services, such as health clinics and schools. In the weakest of these countries, communal, criminal, or terrorist groups will seek control of government institu- tions and/or territory. Overall, the number of states which has more than tripled since and has grown per- cent since is likely to increase at a slower rate through . This growth will result from remaining cases of decolonization and to communal tensions leading to state secession, most likely in Sub-Saharan Africa, Central Asia, and Indonesia. In some cases, new states will inspire other secessionist move- ments, destabilizing countries where minorities were not initially seeking secession. At the same time, the very concept of belong- ing to a particular state probably will erode among a growing number of people with con- tinuing transnational ties to more than one country through citizenship, residence or other associations. International Cooperation Globalization and technological change are raising widespread expectations that increased international cooperation will help manage many transnational problems that states can no longer manage on their own. Efforts to realize such expectations will increase, but concerns about national interests as well as the costs and risks involved in some types of international activism will limit success. Mechanisms of international cooperation intended to facilitate bargaining, elucidate common interests and resolve differences among states have increased rapidly in recent decades. International treaties registered with the United Nations more than tripled between and . In addition, there are growing numbers of agreements on standards and practices initiated by self-selected private networks. The number of international institutions increased by two-thirds from until , while at the same time becoming more complex, more interrelated with often over- lapping areas of responsibility, and more closely linked to transnational networks and private groups. International cooperation will continue to increase through , particularly when large economic stakes have mobilized the for-pro t sector, and/or when there is intense interest from nonpro t groups and networks. Most high-income democratic states will par- ticipate in multiple international institutions and seek cooperation on a wide range of issues to protect their interests and to promote their in uence. Members of the European Union will tackle the most ambitious agenda, including signi cant political and security cooperation. Strongly nationalistic and/or autocratic states will play selective roles in inter-governmental organizations: working within them to protect and project their interests, while working against initiatives that they view as threatening to their domestic power structures and national sovereignty. They will also work against those international institutions viewed as creatures of the established great powers and thus rigged against them such as the IMF and the WTO as well as those that cede a major role to non- state actors. Low-income developing countries will partici- pate actively in international organizations and arrangements to assert their sovereignty, garner resources for social and economic develop- ment, and gain support for the incumbent gov- ernment. The most unstable of these states will participate in international organizations and arrangements primarily to maintain interna- tional recognition for the regime. Agenda for International Cooperation Cooperation is likely to be effective in such areas as: Monitoring international nancial ows and nancial safehavens. Law enforcement against corruption, and against traf cking in narcotics and women and children. Monitoring meteorological data and warn- ing of extreme weather events. Selected environmental issues, such as reducing substances that deplete the ozone layer or conserving high-seas sheries. Developing vaccines or medicines against major infectious diseases, such as HIV/ AIDS or malaria and surveillance of infec- tious disease outbreaks. Humanitarian assistance for refugees and for victims of famines, natural disasters, and internal con icts where relief organi- zations can gain access. Counterterrorism. Efforts by international and regional orga- nizations to resolve some internal and interstate con icts, particularly in Africa. Cooperation is likely to be contentious and with mixed results in such areas as: Conditions under which Intellectual Prop- erty Rights are protected. Reform and strengthening of international nancial institutions, particularly the Bret- ton Woods institutions. Expansion of the UN Security Council. Adherence by major states to an Interna- tional Criminal Court with universal, com- prehensive jurisdiction. Control of greenhouse gas emissions to reduce global warming, carrying out the purposes of the Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change. Acceptance of genetically-modi ed organ- isms to improve nutrition and health in poor regions. Establishing peacekeeping forces and standby military forces under the authority of the UN Security Council or most regional organizations, with the possible exception of the EU. (continued) Future Con ict Through , internal con icts will pose the most frequent threat to stability around the world. Interstate wars, though less frequent, will grow in lethality due to the availability of more destructive technologies. The interna- tional community will have to deal with the military, political, and economic dimensions of the rise of China and India and the continued decline of Russia. Internal Con icts Many internal con icts, particularly those aris- ing from communal disputes, will continue to be vicious, long-lasting and dif cult to termi- nate leaving bitter legacies in their wake. They frequently will spawn internal displace- ments, refugee ows, humanitarian emergen- cies, and other regionally destabilizing dislocations. If left to fester, internal con icts will trigger spillover into inter-state con icts as neighbor- ing states move to exploit opportunities for gain or to limit the possibilities of damage to their national interests. Weak states will spawn recurrent internal con icts, threatening the stability of a global- izing international system. Internal con icts stemming from state repres- sion, religious and ethnic grievances, increas- ing migration pressures, and/or indigenous protest movements will occur most frequently in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Caucasus and Cen- tral Asia, and parts of south and southeast Asia, Central America and the Andean region. Military action by forces authorized by the United Nations to correct abuses of human rights within states, pursuant to an asserted principle of humanitarian intervention or an expanded right of secession. Although coalitions of the willing will undertake such operations from time to time, a signi cant number of states will continue to view such inter- ventions as illegitimate interference in the internal affairs of sovereign states. Proposed new rights to enjoy or appro- priate elements of the global com- mons, such as a right to open borders for people from lower-income countries. Agenda for International Cooperation (mixed results continued) DI Cartography Center AI - Current Ethnic Diversity of States High: ranked below . on index of ethnic concentration Medium: ranked between . and . on index of ethnic concentration Low: ranked at or greater than . on index of ethnic concentration No data Ethnic Diversitya aCalculated in the Herfindahl index from data on ethnic composition from the Correlates of War project, census estimates, or other unclassified sources; data for the United States are from the US Bureau of the Census Statistical Abstract of the United States, . Other data are derived from the State Failure Project. Russia s decline. By , Russia will be challenged even more than today to adjust its expectations for world leadership to the dra- matically reduced resources it will have to play that role. The quality of Russian gover- nance is an open question as is whether the country will be able to make the transition in a manner that preserves rather than upsets regional stability. Japan s uncertainty. In the view of many experts, Japan will have dif culty maintain- ing its current position as the world s third largest economy by . Tokyo has so far not shown a willingness to carry through the painful economic reforms necessary to slow the erosion of its leadership role in Asia. In the absence of an external shock, Japan is similarly unlikely to accelerate changes in security policy. India s prospects. India will strengthen its role as a regional power, but many uncertain- ties about the effects of global trends on its society cast doubt on how far India will go. India faces growing extremes between wealth and poverty, a mixed picture on natural resources, and problems with internal gover- nance. The changing dynamics of state power will com- bine with other factors to affect the risk of con- flict in various regions. Changing military capabilities will be prominent among the factors that determine the risk of war. In South Asia, for example, that risk will remain fairly high over the next years. India and Pakistan are both prone to miscalculation. Both will continue to build up their nuclear and missile forces. India most likely will expand the size of its nuclear-capable force. Pakistan s nuclear and missile forces also will continue to increase. Islamabad has publicly claimed that the num- ber of nuclear weapons and missiles it deploys will be based on minimum deterrence and will be independent of the size of India s arse- nal. A noticeable increase in the size of India s arsenal, however, would prompt Pakistan to further increase the size of its own arsenal. Russia will be unable to maintain conventional forces that are both sizable and modern or to project signi cant military power with conven- tional means. The Russian military will increasingly rely on its shrinking strategic and theater nuclear arsenals to deter or, if deter- rence fails, to counter large-scale conventional assaults on Russian territory. Moscow will maintain as many strategic mis- siles and associated nuclear warheads as it believes it can afford but well short of START I or II limitations. The total Russian force by , including air launched cruise missiles, probably will be below , warheads. As Russia struggles with the constraints on its ambitions, it will invest scarce resources in selected and secretive military technology pro- grams, especially WMD, hoping to counter Western conventional and strategic superiority in areas such as ballistic missile defense. China s People s Liberation Army (PLA) will remain the world s largest military, but the majority of the force will not be fully modern- ized by . China could close the technologi- cal gap with the West in one or more major weapons systems. China s capability for regional military operations is likely to improve signi cantly by . China will be exploiting advanced weapons and production technologies acquired from abroad Russia, Israel, Europe, Japan, and the United States that will enable it to integrate naval and air capabilities against Taiwan and potential adversaries in the South China Sea. China: How to Think About Its Growing Wealth and Power China has been riding the crest of a signi - cant wave of economic growth for two decades. Many experts assess that China can maintain a growth rate of percent or more for many years. Such impressive rates pro- vide a foundation for military potential, and some predict that China s rapid economic growth will lead to a signi cant increase in military capabilities. But the degree to which an even more powerful economy would translate into greater military power is uncertain. The relationship between economic growth and China s overall power will derive from the priorities of leaders in Beijing provided the regime remains stable. China s leaders have assessed for some years that compre- hensive national power derives both from economic strength and from the military and diplomatic resources that a healthy, large economy makes possible. They apparently agree that, for the foreseeable future, such priorities as agricultural and national infra- structure modernization must take prece- dence over military development. In the absence of a strong national security chal- lenge, this view is unlikely to change even as new leaders emerge in Beijing. In a stable environment, two leadership transitions will occur in China between now and . The evidence strongly suggests that the new lead- ers will be even more rmly committed to developing the economy as the foundation of national power and that resources for military capabilities will take a secondary role. Existing priorities and projected defense allocations could enable the PLA to emerge as the most powerful regional military force. Beyond resource issues, China faces daunt- ing challenges in producing defense sys- tems. Beijing has yet to demonstrate an assured capacity to translate increasingly sophisticated science and technology advances into rst-rate military produc- tion. To achieve this, China must effect reforms in its State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), develop a capacity for advanced systems integration skills, and recruit and retain technologically sophisticated of cers and enlisted personnel. A decision to alter priorities to emphasize military development would require substan- tial change in the leadership. Internal insta- bility or a rise in nationalism could produce such change but also probably would result in economic decline. In the event of a peaceful resolution of the Taiwan issue, some of China s military objec- tives such as protecting the sea lanes for Persian Gulf oil could become more con- gruent with those of the United States. Never- theless, as an emerging regional power, China would continue to expand its in uence with- out regard to US interests. China by will have deployed tens to several tens of missiles with nuclear war- heads targeted against the United States, mostly more survivable land- and sea-based mobile missiles. It also will have hundreds of shorter-range ballistic and cruise missiles for use in regional con icts. Some of these shorter-range missiles will have nuclear war- heads; most will be armed with conventional warheads. Japan has a small but modern military force, more able than any other in Asia to integrate large quantities of new weaponry. Japan s future military strength will re ect the state of its economy and the health of its security rela- tionship with the United States. Tokyo will increasingly pursue greater autonomy in secu- rity matters and develop security enhance- ments, such as defense improvements and more active diplomacy, to supplement the US alliance. A uni ed Korea with a signi cant US military presence may become a regional military power. For the next to years, however, knowledgeable observers suggest that the pro- cess of uni cation will consume South Korea s energies and resources. Absent uni cation, North Korea s WMD capa- bilities will continue to cloud regional stability. P yongyang probably has one, possibly two, nuclear weapons. It has developed medium- range missiles for years and has tested a three- stage space launch vehicle. P yonyang may improve the accuracy, range, and payload capabilities of its Taepo Dong- ICBM, deploy variants, or develop more capa- ble systems. North Korea could have a few to several Taepo Dong- type missiles deployed by . In the Middle East, the con uence of domestic economic pressures and regional rivalries is likely to further the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. By contrast, spending on conventional arms probably will remain stable or decline in most countries. Some governments may main- tain large armed forces to absorb otherwise unemployable youths, but such armies will be less well trained and equipped. Rather than conventional war, the region is likely to experi- ence more terrorism, insurgencies, and humani- tarian emergencies arising from internal disparities or disputes over ethnic or religious identity. Iran sees its short- and medium-range mis- siles as deterrents, as force-multiplying weapons of war, primarily with conventional warheads, and as options for delivering bio- logical, chemical, and eventually nuclear weapons. Iran could test an IRBM or land- attack cruise missile by and perhaps even an ICBM or space launch vehicle as early as . Iraq s ability to obtain WMD will be in u- enced, in part, by the degree to which the UN Security Council can impede development or procurement over the next years. Under some scenarios, Iraq could test an ICBM capable of delivering nuclear-sized payloads to the United States before ; foreign assistance would affect the capabilities of the missile and the time it became available. Iraq could also develop a nuclear weapon during this period. Reacting to US Military Superiority Experts agree that the United States, with its decisive edge in both information and weapons technology, will remain the dominant military power during the next years. Further bolster- ing the strong position of the United States are its unparalleled economic power, its university system, and its investment in research and development half of the total spent annually by the advanced industrial world. Many poten- tial adversaries, as re ected in doctrinal writ- ings and statements, see US military concepts, together with technology, as giving the United States the ability to expand its lead in conven- tional war ghting capabilities. This perception among present and potential adversaries will continue to generate the pursuit of asymmetric capabilities against US forces and interests abroad as well as the territory of the United States. US opponents state and such nonstate actors as drug lords, terrorists, and foreign insurgents will not want to engage the US military on its terms. They will choose instead political and military strategies designed to dissuade the United States from using force, or, if the United States does use force, to exhaust American will, circumvent or minimize US strengths, and exploit perceived US weaknesses. Asymmetric challenges can arise across the spectrum of con ict that will confront US forces in a theater of operations or on US soil. It is also generally recognized that the United States and other developed countries will con- tinue to possess the political, economic, mili- tary, and technological advantages including through National Missile and Theater Missile Defense systems to reduce the gains of adver- saries from lateral or side-wise technological improvements to their capabilities. Threats to Critical Infrastructure. Some potential adversaries will seek ways to threaten the US homeland. The US national infrastruc- ture communications, transportation, nan- cial transactions, energy networks is vulnerable to disruption by physical and elec- tronic attack because of its interdependent nature and by cyber attacks because of their dependence on computer networks. Foreign governments and groups will seek to exploit Central Asia: Regional Hot Spot? The interests of Russia, China, and India as well as of Iran and Turkey will intersect in Central Asia; the states of that region will attempt to balance those powers as well as keep the United States and the West engaged to prevent their domination by an outside power. The greatest danger to the region, however, will not be a con ict between states, which is unlikely, but the corrosive impact of communal con icts and politicial insur- gencies, possibly abetted by outside actors and nanced at least in part by narcotraf ckers. such vulnerabilities using conventional muni- tions, information operations, and even WMD. Over time, such attacks increasingly are likely to be delivered by computer networks rather than by conventional munitions, as the af nity for cyber attacks and the skill of US adversaries in employing them evolve. Cyber attacks will provide both state and nonstate adversaries new options for action against the United States beyond mere words but short of physical attack strategic options that include selection of either nonlethal or lethal damage and the prospect of anonymity. Information Operations. In addition to threat- ening the US national infrastructure, adversar- ies will seek to attack US military capabilities through electronic warfare, psychological oper- ations, denial and deception, and the use of new technologies such as directed energy weapons or electromagnetic pulse weapons. The primary purpose would be to deny US forces informa- tion superiority, to prevent US weapons from working, and to undermine US domestic sup- port for US actions. Adversaries also are likely to use cyber attacks to complicate US power projection in an era of decreasing permanent US military presence abroad by seeking to dis- rupt military networks during deployment oper- ations when they are most stressed. Many countries have programs to develop such tech- nologies; few have the foresight or capability to fully integrate these various tools into a com- prehensive attack. But they could develop such capabilities over the next decade and beyond. Terrorism. Much of the terrorism noted earlier will be directed at the United States and its overseas interests. Most anti-US terrorism will be based on perceived ethnic, religious or cul- tural grievances. Terrorist groups will continue to nd ways to attack US military and diplo- matic facilities abroad. Such attacks are likely to expand increasingly to include US compa- nies and American citizens. Middle East and Southwest Asian-based terrorists are the most likely to threaten the United States. Weapons of Mass Destruction. WMD pro- grams re ect the motivations and intentions of the governments that produce them and, there- fore, can be altered by the change of a regime or by a regime s change of view. Linear projec- tions of WMD are intended to assess what the picture will look like if changes in motivations and intentions do not occur. Short- and medium-range ballistic missiles, particularly if armed with WMD, already pose a signi cant threat overseas to US interests, military forces, and allies. By , the United States, barring major political changes in these countries, will face ICBM threats from North Korea, probably from Iran, and possibly from Iraq, in addition to long-standing threats from Russia and China. Weapons development programs, in many cases fueled by foreign assistance, have led to new capabilities as illustrated by Iran s Shahab- launches in and and North Korea s Taepo Dong- space launch attempt in August . In addition, some countries that have been traditional recipients of missile technologies have become exporters. Sales of ICBMs or space launch vehicles, which have inherent ICBM capabilities, could further increase the number of coun- tries that will be able to threaten the United States with a missile strike. The probability that a missile armed with WMD would be used against US forces or interests is higher today than during most of the Cold War and will continue to grow. The emerging missile threats will be mounted by countries possessing considerably fewer mis- siles with far less accuracy, yield, survivability, reliability, and range-payload capability than the strategic forces of the Soviet Union. North Korea s space launch attempt in demon- strated that P yongyang is seeking a long-range missile capability that could be used against US forces and interests abroad and against US ter- ritory itself. Moreover, many of the countries developing longer-range missiles assess that the mere threat of their use would complicate US crisis decisionmaking and potentially would deter Washington from pursuing certain objectives. Other means to deliver WMD against the United States will emerge, some cheaper and more reliable and accurate than early-genera- tion ICBMs. The likelihood of an attack by these means is greater than that of a WMD attack with an ICBM. The goal of the adversary would be to move the weapon within striking distance by using short- and medium-range missiles deployed on surface ships or covert missions using military special operations forces or state intelligence services. Non-mis- sile delivery means, however, do not provide the same prestige, deterrence, and coercive diplomacy associated with ICBMs. Chemical and biological threats to the United States will become more widespread; such capabilities are easier to develop, hide, and deploy than nuclear weapons. Some terrorists or insurgents will attempt to use such weapons against US interests against the United States itself, its forces or facilities overseas, or its allies. Moreover, the United States would be affected by the use of such weapons anywhere in the world because Washington would be called on to help contain the damage and to provide scienti c expertise and economic assis- tance to deal with the effects. Such weapons could be delivered through a variety of means, including missiles, unmanned aerial vehicles, or covertly via land, air, and sea. Theater-range ballistic and cruise missile pro- liferation will continue. Most proliferation will involve systems a generation or two behind state of the art, but they will be substantially new capabilities for the states that acquire WMD Proliferation and the Potential for Unconventional Warfare and Escalation The risks of escalation inherent in direct armed con ict will be magni ed by the availability of WMD; consequently, prolif- eration will tend to spur a reversion to prolonged, lower-level con ict by other means: intimidation, subversion, terror- ism, proxies, and guerrilla operations. This trend already is evident between Israel and some of its neighbors and between India and Pakistan. In the event of war, urban ghting will be typical and consequently, civilian casualties will be high relative to those among combatants. Technology will count for less, and large, youthful, and motivated populations for more. Exploitation of communal divisions within an adversary s civil populations will be seen as a key to winning such con- icts increasing their bitterness and thereby prolonging them. Trends in Global Defense Spending and Armaments Defense-related technologies will advance rapidly over the next years particularly precision weapons, information systems and communications. The development and inte- grated application of these technologies will occur mostly in the advanced countries, par- ticularly the United States. Given the high costs and complexity of technical and opera- tional integration, few nations will assign high priority to the indigenous development of such military technology. Non-US global defense spending has dropped some percent since the late s. Military modernization accounts, particularly procurement, have been hit hard. The global arms market has decreased by more than percent during the same period. Indications are that global defense spend- ing may be recovering from mid- s lows; part of East Asia, for example, could experience rises in defense spending over the next decade, but, overall, long-term spending patterns are uncertain. Over the past decade, a slow but persistent transformation has occurred in the arms pro- curement strategies of states. Many states are attempting to diversify sources of arms for reasons that vary from fears of arms embargoes, to declining defense budgets, or to a desire to acquire limited numbers of cut- ting-edge technologies. Their efforts include developing a mix of indigenous production; codeveloping, coproducing, or licensing pro- duction; purchasing entire weapon systems; or leasing capabilities. At the same time, many arms-producing states, confronted with declining domestic arms needs but determined to maintain defense industries, are commercializing defense production and aggressively expanding arms exports. Together, the above factors suggest: Technology diffusion to those few states with a motivation to arm and the economic resources to do so will accelerate as weap- ons and militarily relevant technologies are moved rapidly and routinely across national borders in response to increasingly commer- cial rather than security calculations. For such militarily related technologies as the Global Positioning System, satellite imagery, and communications, technological superi- ority will be dif cult to maintain for very long. In an environment of broad technologi- cal diffusion, nonmaterial elements of mili- tary power strategy, doctrine, and training will increase in importance over the next years in deciding combat out- comes. (continued) them. Such missiles will be capable of delivering WMD or conventional payloads inter-regionally against xed targets. Major air and sea ports, logistics bases and facilities, troop concentrations, and xed communica- tions nodes increasingly will be at risk. Land-attack cruise missiles probably will be more accurate than ballistic missiles. Access to Space. US competitors and adversar- ies realize the degree to which access to space is critical to US military power, and by they will have made strides in countering US space dominance. International commercializa- tion of space will give states and nonstate adversaries access rivaling today s major space powers in such areas as high-resolution reconnaissance and weather prediction, global encrypted communications, and precise navigation. When combined, such services will provide adversaries who are aware of US and allied force deployments the capability for precise targeting and global coordination of operations. Moreover, many adversaries will have developed capabilities to degrade US space assets in particular, with attacks against ground facilities, electronic warfare, and denial and deception. By , several countries will have such counterspace technologies as improved space-object tracking, signal jam- ming, and directed-energy weapons such as low-power lasers. Major Regions The following snapshots of individual regions result from our assessment of trends and from estimates by regional experts as to where spe- ci c nations will be in years. To make these judgments, we have distilled the views Export regimes and sanctions will be dif- cult to manage and less effective in con- trolling arms and weapons technology transfers. The resultant proliferation of WMD and long-range delivery systems would be destabilizing and increase the risk of miscalculation and con ict that produces high casualties. Advantages will go to states that have a strong commercial technology sector and develop effective ways to link these capa- bilities to their national defense indus- trial base. States able to optimize private and public sector linkages could achieve signi cant advancements in weapons systems. The twin developments outlined above constrained defense spending worldwide combined with increasing military techno- logical potential preclude accurate fore- casts of which technologies, in what quantity and form, will be incorporated in the military systems of future adversaries. In many cases, the question will not be which technologies provide the greatest military potential but which will receive the political backing and resources to reach the procurement and elding stage. Moreover, civilian technology develop- ment already is driving military technol- ogy development in many countries. Trends in Global Defense Spending and Armaments (continued) expressed by many outside experts in our conferences and workshops. The results are intended to stimulate debate, not to endorse one view over another. East and Southeast Asia Regional Trends. East Asia over the next years will be characterized by uneven eco- nomic dynamism both between and within states political and national assertiveness rather than ideology, and potential for strategic tension if not outright con ict. The states of the region will be led by generally nationalistic governments eschewing ideology and focusing on nation-building and develop- ment. These states will broadly accommodate international norms on the free ow of informa- tion to modernize their economies, open mar- kets, and ght international crime and disease. They also will encounter pressure for greater political pluralism, democracy, and respect for human rights. Failure to meet popular expecta- tions probably will result in leaders being voted Arms Control: An Uncertain Agenda The last three decades witnessed signi cant negotiations between the United States and the Soviet Union (and Russia), but the future probably will not replicate those efforts in form or magnitude. The INF, CFE, and START I treaties and, to a large extent, the CWC were concluded in an effort to reduce tensions during the Cold War. Veri cation and monitoring in each of these treaties were viewed as essential to their implementation. Prospects for bilateral arms control between the major powers probably will be dim over the next years; progress in multilateral regimes with less intrusive and lower-cer- tainty monitoring probably will grow spo- radically. Beyond this generalization: Efforts will be incremental, focusing mainly on extensions, modi cations or adaptations of existing treaties, such as START III between the United States and Russia or a protocol enhancing veri cation of the Biological Weapons Convention. Efforts will assume a more regional focus as countries of concern continue develop- ing their own WMD arsenals. Safeguarding and controlling transfer of materials and technology for nuclear weapons and missile delivery systems will take on greater importance. Formal agreements probably will contain limited monitoring or veri cation provi- sions. Agreements are more likely to be asymmet- rical in terms of the goals and outcomes. For example, a form of barter may become the norm. Sides will negotiate dissimilar commitments in reaching agreement. An example would be North Korea s willing- ness to give up nuclear weapons and mis- siles in return for electric power and space launch services. out of of ce in democratic states or in wide- spread demonstrations and violence leading to regime collapse in authoritarian states. Political and Security Trends. The major power realignments and the more uid post- Cold War security environment in the region will raise serious questions about how regional leaders will handle nascent great-power rival- ries (the US-China, China-Japan, China-India), related regional hot spots (Taiwan, Korea, South China Sea), the future of challenged political regimes (Indonesia, North Korea absent uni cation, China), and communal ten- sions and minority issues (in China, Indonesia, the Philippines, and Malaysia). On balance, the number and range of rivalries and potential ashpoints suggest a better-than-even chance that episodes of military confrontation and con- ict will erupt over the next years. The implications of the rise of China as an eco- nomic and increasingly capable regional mili- tary power even as the in uence of Communism and authoritarianism weakens pose the greatest uncertainty in the area. Add- ing to uncertainty are the prospects for and implications of Korean uni cation over the next years, and the evolution of Japan s regional leadership aspirations and capabilities. Instability in Russia and Central Asia, and the nuclear standoff between India and Pakistan will be peripheral but still important in East Asian security calculations. The Middle East will become increasingly important as a pri- mary source of energy. Economic Dynamism. While governments in the region generally will accept the need to accommodate international norms on owner- ship, markets, trade, and investment, they will seek to block or slow the perceived adverse economic, political, and social consequences of globalization. The most likely economic outlook will be that rich societies Japan, Korea, Hong Kong, Tai- wan, Singapore, and pockets in China and else- where will get richer, with Japan likely to continue to be a leader in S&T development and applications for commercial use. In con- trast, the poor societies Vietnam, Cambodia, Laos, and rural areas in western China and else- where will fall further behind. Greater eco- nomic links are likely to have been forged between Taiwan, Hong Kong, and South China as a result of the development of investment and infrastructure. China will be increasingly integrated into the world economy through foreign direct investiment, trade, and interna- tional capital markets. Energy markets will have drawn the region more closely together despite lingering issues of ownership of resources and territorial disputes. Key uncertainties will persist on economic per- formance and political stability, including the rising costs of pensions and services for Japan s aging population; the adequacy of energy and water for China, political leadership in Indone- sia and China, and the impact of AIDS in Cam- bodia, Thailand, and Vietnam. Regional Interaction. Given the weakness of regional political-security arrangements, the US political, economic, and security presence will remain pronounced. At the same time, many countries in the region will remain uncer- tain about US objectives, apprehensive of both US withdrawal and US unilateralism. Key states, most signi cantly China and Japan, will continue hedging, by using diplomacy, mili- tary preparations and other means to ensure that their particular interests will be safe- guarded, especially in case the regional situa- tion deteriorates. Japan and others will seek to maintain a US presence, in part to counter China s in uence. Economic and other ties will bind Japan and China, but historical, territorial, and strategic differences will underline continuing wariness between the two. China will want good eco- nomic ties to the United States but also will nurture links to Russia and others to counter the possibility of US pressure against it and to weaken US support for Taiwan and the US security posture in East Asia. US-China con- frontations over Taiwan or over broader com- peting security interests are possible. Although preserving the US alliance, Japanese leaders also will be less certain they can rely on the United States to deal with some security contingencies. More con dent of their ability to handle security issues independently, they will pursue initiatives internally and overseas that are designed to safeguard Japanese interests without direct reference to the US alliance. South Asia Regional Trends. The widening strategic and economic gaps between the two principal pow- ers, India and Pakistan and the dynamic inter- play between their mutual hostility and the instability in Central Asia will de ne the South Asia region in . India will be the unrivaled regional power with a large military including naval and nuclear capabilities and a dynamic and growing economy. The widening India-Paki- stan gap destabilizing in its own right will be accompanied by deep political, economic, and social disparities within both states. Pakistan will be more fractious, isolated, and dependent on international nancial assis- tance. Other South Asian states Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, and Nepal will be drawn closer to and more dependent on India and its econ- omy. Afghanistan will likely remain weak and a destabilizing force in the region and the world. Wary of China, India will look increasingly to the West, but its need for oil and desire to bal- ance Arab ties to Pakistan will lead to strength- ened ties to Persian Gulf states as well. Demographic Challenges. Although popula- tion growth rates in South Asia will decline, population still will grow by nearly percent by . India s population alone will grow to more than . billion. Pakistan s projected growth from million to about million in will put a major strain on an economy already unable to meet the basic needs of the current population. The percentage of urban dwellers will climb steadily from the current - percent of the population to between - percent, leading to continued deteriora- tion in the overall quality of urban life. Differ- ential population growth patterns will exacerbate inequalities in wealth. Ties between provincial and central governments throughout the region will be strained. Resource and Environmental Challenges. Water will remain South Asia s most vital and most contested natural resource. Continued population and economic growth and expan- sion of irrigated agriculture over the next years will increasingly stress water resources, and pollution of surface and groundwater will be a serious challenge. In India, per capita India in . Indian democracy will remain strong, albeit more factionalized by the secular- Hindu nationalist debate, growing differentials among regions and the increase in competitive party politics. India s economy, long repressed by the heavy hand of regulation, is likely to achieve sustained growth to the degree reforms are implemented. High-technology companies will be the most dynamic agents and will lead the thriving service sector in four key urban centers Mumbai, New Delhi, Bangalore, and Chennai. Computer software services and cus- tomized applications will continue to expand as India strengthens economic ties to key interna- tional markets. Industries such as pharmaceuti- cals and agro-processing also will compete globally. Numerous factors provide India a competitive advantage in the global economy. It has the largest English-speaking population in the developing world; its education system produces millions of scienti c and technical personnel. India has a growing business- minded middle class eager to strengthen ties to the outside world, and the large Indian expatri- ate population provides strong links to key mar- kets around the world. Despite rapid economic growth, more than half a billion Indians will remain in dire poverty. Harnessing technology to improve agriculture will be India s main challenge in alleviating poverty in . The widening gulf between have and have-not regions and disagree- ments over the pace and nature of reforms will be a source of domestic strife. Rapidly grow- ing, poorer northern states will continue to drain resources in subsidies and social welfare bene ts. Pakistan in . Pakistan, our conferees con- cluded, will not recover easily from decades of political and economic mismanagement, divi- sive politics, lawlessness, corruption and ethnic friction. Nascent democratic reforms will produce little change in the face of opposition from an entrenched political elite and radical Islamic parties. Further domestic decline would bene t Islamic political activists, who may sig- ni cantly increase their role in national politics and alter the makeup and cohesion of the mili- tary once Pakistan s most capable institution. In a climate of continuing domestic turmoil, the central government s control probably will be reduced to the Punjabi heartland and the eco- nomic hub of Karachi. Other Regional States. Prospects for Afghani- stan, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka in appear bleak. Decades of foreign domination and civil war have devastated Afghanistan s society and economy, and the country is likely to remain internationally isolated, a major narcotics exporter, and a haven for Islamic radicals and ter- rorist groups. Bangladesh will not abandon democracy but will be characterized by coalitions or weak one-party governments, fragile institu- tions of governance, deep-seated leadership squabbles, and no notion of a loyal opposition. Security and Political Concerns Predominate. The threat of major con ict between India and Pakistan will overshadow all other regional issues during the next years. Continued tur- moil in Afghanistan and Pakistan will spill over into Kashmir and other areas of the subconti- nent, prompting Indian leaders to take more aggressive preemptive and retaliatory actions. India s conventional military advantage over Pakistan will widen as a result of New Delhi s superior economic position. India will also con- tinue to build up its ocean-going navy to domi- nate the Indian Ocean transit routes used for delivery of Persian Gulf oil to Asia. The deci- sive shift in conventional military power in India s favor over the coming years potentially will make the region more volatile and unsta- ble. Both India and Pakistan will see weapons of mass destruction as a strategic imperative and will continue to amass nuclear warheads and build a variety of missile delivery systems. Russia and Eurasia Regional Trends. Uncertainties abound about the future internal con guration, geopolitical dynamics, and degree of turbulence within and among former Soviet states. Russia and the other states of Eurasia are likely to fall short in resolving critical impediments to economic and political reform in their struggle to manage the negative legacies of the Soviet period. Chang- ing demographics, chronic economic dif cul- ties, and continued questions about governance will constrain Russia s ability to project its power beyond the former Soviet republics to the south, complicate Ukraine s efforts to draw closer to the West, and retard the development of stable, open political structures throughout the Caucasus and Central Asia. Those states that could make progress on the basis of poten- tial energy revenues are likely to fail because of corruption and the absence of structural eco- nomic reform. The rapid pace of scienti c and technological innovation, as well as globaliza- tion, will leave these states further behind the West as well as behind the major emerging markets. The economic challenges to these countries will remain daunting: insuf cient structural reform, poor productivity in agriculture as compared with Western standards, decaying infrastructure and environmental degradation. Corruption and organized crime, sustained by drug traf cking, money laundering, and other illegal enterprises and, in several instances, protected by corrupt political allies, will persist. Demographic pressures also will affect the eco- nomic performance and political cohesiveness of these states. Because of low birthrates and falling life expectancy among males, the popu- lations of the Slavic core and much of the Cau- casus will continue to decline; Russian experts predict that the country s population could fall from million at present to - million by . At the other end of the spectrum, the Central Asian countries will face a growing youth cohort that will peak around before resuming a more gradual pattern of population growth. The centrality of Russia will continue to dimin- ish, and by Eurasia will be a geographic term lacking a unifying political, economic, and cultural reality. Russia and the western Eurasian States will continue to orient them- selves toward Europe but will remain essen- tially outside of it. Because of geographic proximity and cultural af nities, the Caucasus will be closer politically to their neighbors to the south and west, with Central Asia drawing closer to South Asia and China. Nonetheless, important interdependencies will remain, pri- marily in the energy sphere. Russia will remain the most important actor in the former Soviet Union. Its power relative to others in the region and neighboring areas will have declined, however, and it will continue to lack the resources to impose its will. The Soviet economic inheritance will continue to plague Russia. Besides a crumbling physical infrastructure, years of environmental neglect are taking a toll on the population, a toll made worse by such societal costs of transition as alcoholism, cardiac diseases, drugs, and a worsening health delivery system. Russia s population is not only getting smaller, but it is becoming less and less healthy and thus less able to serve as an engine of economic recov- ery. In macro economic terms Russia s GDP probably has bottomed out. Russia, neverthe- less, is still likely to fall short in its efforts to become fully integrated into the global nan- cial and trading system by . Even under a best case scenario of ve percent annual eco- nomic growth, Russia would attain an economy less than one- fth the size of that of the United States. Many Russian futures are possible, ranging from political resurgence to dissolution. The general drift, however, is toward authoritarian- ism, although not to the extreme extent of the Soviet period. The factors favoring this course are President Putin s own bent toward hierar- chical rule from Moscow; the population s gen- eral support of this course as an antidote to the messiness and societal disruption of the post- Soviet transition; the ability of the ruling elite to hold on to power because of the lack of effective national opposition, thus making that elite accountable only to itself; and the ongoing shift of tax resources from the regions to the center. This centralizing tendency will contrib- ute to dysfunctional governance. Effective gov- ernance is nearly impossible under such centralization for a country as large and diverse as Russia and lacking well-ordered, disciplined national bureaucracies. Recentralization, how- ever, will be constrained by the interconnected- ness brought about by the global information revolution, and by the gradual, although uneven, growth of civil society. Russia will focus its foreign policy goals on reestablishing lost in uence in the former Soviet republics to the south, fostering ties to Europe and Asia, and presenting itself as a sig- ni cant player vis-a-vis the United States. Its energy resources will be an important lever for these endeavors. However, its domestic ills will frustrate its efforts to reclaim its great power status. Russia will maintain the second largest nuclear arsenal in the world as the last vestige of its old status. The net outcome of these trends will be a Russia that remains internally weak and institutionally linked to the interna- tional system primarily through its permanent seat on the UN Security Council. Ukraine s path to the West will be constrained by widespread corruption, the power of crimi- nal organizations, and lingering questions over its commitment to the rule of law. Kiev will remain vulnerable to Russian pressures, prima- rily because of its continued energy depen- dence, but Ukrainians of all political stripes and likely to opt for independence rather than rein- tegration into Russia s sphere of in uence. In , the South Caucasus will remain in flux because of unresolved local conflicts, weak economic fundamentals, and continued Russian meddling. Georgia probably will have achieved a measure of political and economic stability, fueled in part by energy transit revenues, but it will remain the focus of Russian attention in the region. Armenia will remain largely isolated and is likely to remain a Russian or possibly Iranian client and, therefore, a regional wild card. Azerbaijan s success in developing its energy sector is unlikely to bring widespread prosperity: Baku will be a one-sector economy with pervasive corruption at all levels of society. In Central Asia, social, environmental, reli- gious, and possibly ethnic strains will grow. Wasteful water-intensive practices and pollution of ground water and arable land will lead to continued shortages for agricultural and energy generation. The high birthrates of the s and early s will lead to strains on education, healthcare, and social services. The region also is likely to be the scene of increased competition among surrounding powers Rus- sia, China, India, Iran, and possibly Turkey for control, in uence, and access to energy resources. Developments in Afghanistan and Pakistan will threaten regional stability. potentially destabilizing options for those states. New relationships between geographic regions could emerge between North Africa and Europe (on trade); India, China and the Persian Gulf (on energy); and Israel, Turkey, and India (on economic, technical, and in the case of Turkey, security considerations). A key driver for the Middle East over the next years will be demographic pressures, specif- ically how to provide jobs, housing, public ser- vices, and subsidies for rapidly growing and increasingly urban populations. By , in much of the Middle East populations will be signi cantly larger, poorer, more urban, and more disillusioned. In nearly all Middle Eastern countries, more than half the population is now under years of age. These populations will continue to have very large youth cohorts through , with the labor force growing at an average rate of . percent per year. The problem of job placement is compounded by weak educational systems producing a genera- tion lacking the technical and problem-solving skills required for economic growth. Globalization. With the exception of Israel, Middle Eastern states will view globalization more as a challenge than an opportunity. Although the Internet will remain con ned to a small elite due to relatively high cost, undevel- oped infrastructures, and cultural obstacles, the information revolution and other technological advances probably will have a net destabilizing effect on the Middle East by raising expecta- tions, increasing income disparities, and erod- ing the power of regimes to control information or mold popular opinion. Attracting foreign direct investment will also be dif cult: except for the energy sector, investors will tend to shy away from these countries, discouraged by overbearing state sectors; heavy, opaque, and arbitrary government regulation; underdevel- oped nancial sectors; inadequate physical infrastructure; and the threat of political instability. Political Change. Most Middle Eastern gov- ernments recognize the need for economic restructuring and even a modicum of greater political participation, but they will proceed cautiously, fearful of undermining their rule. As some governments or sectors embrace the new economy and civil society while others cling to more traditional paradigms, inequities between and within states will grow. Islamists could come to power in states that are begin- ning to become pluralist and in which entrenched secular elites have lost their appeal. Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Trends. The interplay of demograph- ics and disease as well as poor governance will be the major determinants of Africa s increasing international marginalization in . Most African states will miss out on the economic growth engendered elsewhere by globalization and by scienti c and technologi- cal advances. Only a few countries will do better, while a handful of states will have hardly any relevance to the lives of their citi- zens. As Sub-Saharan Africa s multiple and interconnected problems are compounded, eth- nic and communal tensions will intensify, peri- odically escalating into open con ict, often spreading across borders and sometimes spawning secessionist states. In the absence of a major medical break- through, the relentless progression of AIDS and other diseases will decimate the economically productive adult population, sharply accentuate the continent s youth bulge, and generate a ing out to , Europe s agenda will be to put in place the nal components of EU integra- tion; to take advantage of globalization; to sus- tain a strong IT and S&T base to tackle changing demographics; and to wean the Bal- kans away from virulent nationalism. EU enlargement, institutional reform, and a common foreign, security and defense policy will play out over the next years, so that by the nal contours of the European project are likely to be rmly set. Having absorbed at least new members, the Euro- pean Union will have achieved its geographic and institutional limits. As a consequence of long delays in gaining EU entry (and the after-effects of actual membership), leaders in some Central/East- ern Europe countries will be susceptible to pressures from authoritarian, nationalist forces on both the left and right. These forces will capitalize on public resentment about the effects of EU policy and globalization, including unemployment, foreign ownership, and cultural penetration. The EU will not include Russia. The Europe- ans, nevertheless, will seek to engage Moscow encouraging stability and main- taining dialogue. Although Russia will con- tinue to recede in importance to the European governments, they will use US handling of Russia as a barometer of how well or poorly Washington is exerting leadership and defending European interests. Economic Reform & Globalization. EU gov- ernments will continue to seek a third way between state control and unbridled capitalism: piecemeal and often unavowed economic reform driven in part by an ever denser network of overseas business relationships and changes in corporate governance. Lingering labor mar- ket rigidity and state regulation will hamper restructuring, retooling, and reinvestment strat- egies. Europe will trail the United States in entrepreneurship and innovation as govern- ments seek ways to balance encouragement of these factors against social effects. Thus, Europe will not achieve fully the dreams of par- ity with the United States as a shaper of the glo- bal economic system. In Prague, Vienna, and other European capitals, protestors have questioned the merits of global- ization. By , Europe will have globalized more extensively than some of its political rhetoric will suggest. It also will have less dif culty than other regions coping with rapid change because of high education and techno- logical levels. States will continue to push private sector competitiveness in the interna- tional market. Three of the top ve information technology centers in the world will be in Europe: London, Munich, and Paris. Many Europeans will see the role of foreign policy as protecting their social and cultural identities from the excesses of globaliza- tion and from its superpatron, the United States. One of the ways in which leaders will respond will be to clamor for greater political control over international nancial and trade institutions. The aging of the population and low birthrates will be major challenges to European prosper- ity and cohesion. Greater percentages of state budgets will have to be allocated to the aging, while, at the same time, there will be signi - cant, chronic shortages both of highly skilled workers in IT and other professions and unskilled workers in basic services. Legal and illegal immigration will mitigate labor short- ages to a limited extent but at a cost in terms of social friction and crime. As EU governments grapple with immigration policy and European and national identity, anti-immigrant sentiment will gure more prominently in the political arena throughout Western Europe. Turkey. The future direction of Turkey, both internally and geopolitically, will have a major impact on the region, and on US and Western interests. Shifting political dynamics; debates over identity, ethnicity and the role of religion in the state; and the further development of civil society will gure prominently in Turkey s domestic agenda. The road to Turkish member- ship in the EU will be long and dif cult, and EU member states will evaluate Turkey s candidacy not only on the basis of economic performance, but on how well it tackles this comprehensive agenda. Part of Turkey s success will hinge on the effectiveness of a growing private sector in advancing Turkey s reform efforts and its goal of full integration in the West. NATO s involvement in the Ballkans and expected enlargement in southern Europe will increase ties between Turkey and the West. By dint of its history, location, and interests, Turkey will continue to pay attention to its neighbors to the north in the Caucasus and Central Asia and to the south and east Syria, Iraq and Iran. With few exceptions, these states will continue to struggle with questions of governance. As Turkey crafts policies toward the countries in these regions, no single issue will dominate its national security agenda. Rather, Ankara will nd itself having to cope with regional rivalries including what policies to adopt toward internal and interstate con icts proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the politics and economics of energy transport, and water rights. Europe and the World. Europe s agenda will require it to demonstrate in uence in world affairs commensurate with its size in popula- tion and economic strength. The EU s global reach will be based primarily on economics: robust trade and investment links to the United States and growing ties to East and Southeast Asia and Latin America. In dealing with matters outside the region, European leaders will construe their global responsibilities as building legal mechanisms, encouraging diplomatic contact, and to a lesser extent providing nonmilitary aid. They will respond sporadically to foreign crises either through the UN or in ad hoc coalitions of the willing with Washington or others but they will not make strong and consistent over- seas commitments, particularly in regard to sending troops. Transatlantic Links. Economic issues will have overtaken security issues in importance by , and the United States will see its relations with Europe de ned increasingly through the EU, not only on the basis of trade but in the context of using economic tools such as aid and preferential trading regimes to underwrite peace initiatives. By , NATO will have accepted many, but not all, Central/Eastern European countries. European Security and Defense Policy will be set in terms of partnership with, rather than replacement of, NATO. Canada Trends. Canada will be a full participant in the globalization process in and a leading player in the Americas after the United States, along with Mexico and Brazil. Ottawa will still be grappling with the political, demographic, and cultural impact of heavy Asian immigra- tion in the West as well as residual nationalist sentiment in French-speaking Quebec. The vast and diverse country, however, will remain sta- ble amidst constant, dynamic change. Ottawa will continue to emphasize the impor- tance of education, and especially science and technology, for the new economy. Canada also will promote policies designed to stem the ow of skilled workers south and will seek to attract skilled immigrants especially professionals from East and South Asia to ensure that Can- ada will be able to take full advantage of global opportunities. The question of Quebec s place in the country will continue to stir national debate. Canada s status as the pre-eminent US eco- nomic partner will be even more pronounced in . National sensitivity to encroaching US culture will remain, even as the two economies become more integrated. Ottawa will retain its interests in the stability and prosperity of East Asia because of growing Canadian economic, cultural, and demographic links to the Paci c region. As additional trade links with Latin America are developed through the North American Free Trade Agreement and a likely Free Trade Area of the Americas, Canada increasingly will take advantage of develop- ments in the Western hemisphere. Although Canadians will focus more on Latin America and less on Europe, they will still look to NATO as the cornerstone of Western security. Like Europeans, Canadians will judge US glo- bal leadership in terms of the relationship with Russia, especially regarding strategic arms and National Missile Defense (NMD). Despite the relatively small size of Canada s armed forces, Ottawa still will seek to partici- pate in global and regional discussions on the future of international peacekeeping. Canada will continue to build on its traditional support for international organizations by working to ensure a more effective UN and greater respect for international treaties, norms, and regimes. Canadians will be sympathetic to calls for greater political management of globaliza- tion to help mitigate adverse impacts on the environment and ensure that globalization s bene ts reach less advantaged regions and states. Latin America Regional Trends. By , many Latin Ameri- can countries will enjoy greater prosperity as a result of expanding hemispheric and global economic links, the information revolution, and lowered birthrates. Progress in building demo- cratic institutions will reinforce reform and promote prosperity by enhancing investor con- dence. Brazil and Mexico will be increasingly con dent and capable actors that will seek a greater voice in hemispheric affairs. But the region will remain vulnerable to nancial crises because of its dependence on external nance and the continuing role of single commodities in most economies. The weakest countries in the region, especially in the Andean region, will fall further behind. Reversals of democracy in some countries will be spurred by a failure to deal effectively with popular demands, crime, corruption, drug traf cking, and insurgencies. Latin America especially Venezuela, Mexico, and Brazil will become an increasingly important oil producer by and an important component of the emerging Atlantic Basin energy system. Its proven oil reserves are second only to those located in the Middle East. Globalization Gains and Limits. Continued trade and investment liberalization and the expansion of free trade agreements within and outside of Latin America will be a signi cant catalyst of growth. Regional trade integration through organizations such as MERCOSUR and the likely conclusion of a Free Trade Area of the Americas will both boost employment and provide the political context for govern- ments to sustain economic reforms even against opposing entrenched interest groups. Latin America s Internet market is poised to grow exponentially, stimulating commerce, foreign investment, new jobs, and corporate ef ciency. Although Internet business opportu- nities will promote the growth of rms through- out the region, Brazil, Argentina, and Mexico are likely to be the biggest bene ciaries. Shifting Demographics. Latin America s demographics will shift markedly to the distinct advantage of some countries helping to ease social strains and underpin higher economic growth. During the next years, most countries will experience a substantial slowdown in the number of new jobseekers, which will help reduce unemployment and boost wages. But not all countries will enjoy these shifts; Bolivia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Hon- duras, Nicaragua, and Paraguay will still face rapidly increasing populations in need of work. Democratization Progress and Setbacks. By , key countries will have made some head- way in building sturdier and more capable dem- ocratic institutions. Democratic institutions in Mexico, Argentina, Chile, and Brazil appear poised for continued incremental consolidation. In other countries, crime, public corruption, the spread of poverty, and the failure of govern- ments to redress worsening income inequality will provide fertile ground for populist and authoritarian politicians. Soaring crime rates will contribute to vigilantism and extrajudicial killings by the police. Burgeoning criminal activity including money laundering, alien smuggling, and narcotraf cking could over- whelm some Caribbean countries. Democrati- zation in Cuba will depend upon how and when Fidel Castro passes from the scene. Growing Regional Gaps. By , the gap between the more prosperous and democratic states of Latin America and the others will widen. Countries that are unable or unwilling to undertake reforms will experience slow growth at best. Several will struggle intermittently with serious domestic political and economic prob- lems such as crime, corruption, and depen- dence on single commodities such as oil. Countries with high crime and widespread corruption will lack the political consensus to advance economic reforms and will face lower growth prospects. Although poverty and ine- quality will remain endemic throughout the region, high-fertility countries will face higher rates of poverty and unemployment. The Andean countries Colombia, Venezuela, Ecuador, and Peru are headed for greater challenges of differing nature and origin. Com- petition for scarce resources, demographic pressures, and a lack of employment opportuni- ties probably will cause workers anger to mount and fuel more aggressive tactics in the future. Fatigue with economic hardship and deep popular cynicism about political institu- tions, particularly traditional parties, could lead to instability in Venezuela, Peru and Ecuador. Resolution of the long-running guerrilla war is key to Colombia s future prospects. The Cuban economy under a Castro Government will fall further behind most of the Latin American countries that embrace globalization and adopt free market practices. Rising Migration. Pressures for legal and ille- gal migration to the United States and region- ally will rise during the next years. Demographic factors, political instability, per- sonal insecurity, poverty, wage differentials, the growth of alien-smuggling networks, and wider family ties will propel more Latin American workers to enter the United States. El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua will become even greater sources of illegal migrants. In Mexico, declining population growth and strong economic prospects will gradually diminish pressures to seek work in the United States, but disparities in living stan- dards, US demand for labor, and family ties will remain strong pull factors. Signi cant political instability during a transition process in Cuba could lead to mass migration. The growth of Central American and Mexi- can alien-smuggling networks will exacer- bate problems along the US border. Illegal migration within the region will become a more contentious issue between Latin Ameri- can governments. Argentina and Venezuela already have millions of undocumented work- ers from neighboring countries, and resentment of illegal workers could increase. Although most Haitian migrants will head for the United States, Haiti s Caribbean neighbors will also experience further strains. Signi cant Discontinuities The trends outlined in this study are based on the combinations of drivers that are most likely over the next years. Nevertheless, the drivers could produce trends quite differ- ent from the ones described. Below are pos- sibilities different from those presented in the body of the study: Serious deterioration of living standards for the bulk of the population in several major Middle Eastern countries and the failure of Israel and the Palestinians to conclude even a cold peace, lead to seri- ous, violent political upheavals in Egypt, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. The trend toward more diverse, free-wheel- ing transnational terrorist networks leads to the formation of an international terror- ist coalition with diverse anti-Western objectives and access to WMD. Another global epidemic on the scale of HIV/AIDS, or rapidly changing weather patterns attributable to global warming, with grave damage and enormous costs for several developed countries sparking an enduring global consensus on the need for concerted action on health issues and the environment. A state of major concern to US strategic interests such as Iran, Nigeria, Israel, or Saudi Arabia fails to manage serious internal religious or ethnic divisions and crisis ensues. A growing antiglobalization movement becomes a powerful sustainable global political and cultural force threatening Western governmental and corporate inter- ests. China, India, and Russia form a defacto geo-strategic alliance in an attempt to counterbalance US and Western in uence. The US-European alliance collapses, owing in part to intensifying trade disputes and competition for leadership in handling security questions. Major Asian countries establish an Asian Monetary Fund or less likely an Asian Trade Organization, undermining the IMF and WTO and the ability of the US to exer- cise global economic leadership. (U) Appendix Four Alternative Global Futures In September-October , the NIC initiated work on Global Trends by cosponsoring with Department of State/INR and CIA s Glo- bal Futures Project two unclassi ed workshops on Alternative Global Futures: - . The workshops brought together several dozen gov- ernment and nongovernment specialists in a wide range of elds. The rst workshop identi ed major factors and events that would drive global change through . It focused on demography, natural resources, science and technology, the global economy, governance, social/cultural identities, and con ict and identi ed main trends and regional variations. These analyses became the basis for subsequent elaboration in Global Trends . The second workshop developed four alterna- tive global futures in which these drivers would interact in different ways through . Each scenario was intended to construct a plausible, policy-relevant story of how this future might evolve: highlighting key uncertainties, disconti- nuities, and unlikely or wild card events, and identifying important policy and intelligence challenges. Scenario One: Inclusive Globalization: A virtuous circle develops among technology, economic growth, demographic factors, and effective governance, which enables a majority of the world s people to bene t from globaliza- tion. Technological development and diffu- sion in some cases triggered by severe environmental or health crises are utilized to grapple effectively with some problems of the developing world. Robust global economic growth spurred by a strong policy consensus on economic liberalization diffuses wealth widely and mitigates many demographic and resource problems. Governance is effective at both the national and international levels. In many countries, the state s role shrinks, as its functions are privatized or performed by pub- lic-private partnerships, while global coopera- tion intensi es on many issues through a variety of international arrangements. Con ict is minimal within and among states bene ting from globalization. A minority of the world s people in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, Central and South Asia, and the Andean region do not bene t from these positive changes, and internal con icts persist in and around those countries left behind. Scenario Two: Pernicious Globalization Global elites thrive, but the majority of the world s population fails to bene t from global- ization. Population growth and resource scarcities place heavy burdens on many devel- oping countries, and migration becomes a major source of interstate tension. Technolo- gies not only fail to address the problems of developing countries but also are exploited by negative and illicit networks and incorporated into destabilizing weapons. The global econ- omy splits into three: growth continues in developed countries; many developing coun- tries experience low or negative per capita growth, resulting in a growing gap with the developed world; and the illicit economy grows dramatically. Governance and political leader- ship are weak at both the national and interna- tional levels. Internal con icts increase, fueled by frustrated expectations, inequities, and heightened communal tensions; WMD prolifer- ate and are used in at least one internal con ict. Scenario Three: Regional Competition Regional identities sharpen in Europe, Asia, and the Americas, driven by growing political resistance in Europe and East Asia to US global preponderance and US-driven globalization and each region s increasing preoccupation with its own economic and political priorities. There is an uneven diffusion of technologies, re ecting differing regional concepts of intel- lectual property and attitudes towards biotech- nology. Regional economic integration in trade and nance increases, resulting in both fairly high levels of economic growth and rising regional competition. Both the state and institu- tions of regional governance thrive in major developed and emerging market countries, as governments recognize the need to resolve pressing regional problems and shift responsi- bilities from global to regional institutions. Given the preoccupation of the three major regions with their own concerns, countries out- side these regions in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, and Central and South Asia have few places to turn for resources or political sup- port. Military con ict among and within the three major regions does not materialize, but internal con icts increase in and around other countries left behind. Scenario Four: Post-Polar World US domestic preoccupation increases as the US economy slows, then stagnates. Economic and political tensions with Europe grow, the US- European alliance deteriorates as the United States withdraws its troops, and Europe turns inward, relying on its own regional institutions. At the same time, national governance crises create instability in Latin America, particularly in Colombia, Cuba, Mexico, and Panama, forcing the United States to concentrate on the region. Indonesia also faces internal crisis and risks disintegration, prompting China to pro- vide the bulk of an ad hoc peacekeeping force. Otherwise, Asia is generally prosperous and stable, permitting the United States to focus elsewhere. Korea s normalization and de facto uni cation proceed, China and Japan provide the bulk of external nancial support for Korean uni cation, and the United States begins withdrawing its troops from Korea and Japan. Over time, these geostrategic shifts ignite longstanding national rivalries among the Asian powers, triggering increased military preparations and hitherto dormant or covert WMD programs. Regional and global institu- tions prove irrelevant to the evolving con ict situation in Asia, as China issues an ultimatum to Japan to dismantle its nuclear program and Japan invoking its bilateral treaty with the US calls for US reengagement in Asia under adverse circumstances at the brink of a major war. Given the priorities of Asia, the Americas, and Europe, countries outside these regions are marginalized, with virtually no sources of political or nancial support. Generalizations Across the Scenarios The four scenarios can be grouped in two pairs: the rst pair contrasting the positive and negative effects of globalization; the second pair contrasting intensely competitive but not con ictual regionalism and the descent into regional military con ict. In all but the rst scenario, globalization does not create widespread global cooperation. Rather, in the second scenario, globalization s negative effects promote extensive disloca- tion and con ict, while in the third and fourth, they spur regionalism. In all four scenarios, countries negatively affected by population growth, resource scar- cities and bad governance, fail to bene t from globalization, are prone to internal con icts, and risk state failure. In all four scenarios, the effectiveness of national, regional, and international gover- nance and at least moderate but steady eco- nomic growth are crucial. In all four scenarios, US global in uence wanes. Population Resources Technology Economy Identity and Governance Conflict Driver Behavior in the Global Futures Scenarios Scenario: Inclusive Globalization Global population increases by billion people. Pressures from population growth mitigated by high average annual economic growth. Urbanization manageable in many countries, but some cities with rapid population growth become politically unstable. High migration beneficial for sending and receiving countries, although controversial in Europe and Japan. Population increases and robust economic growth will stress ecosystems, resulting in soil degradation, CO pollution, deforestation and loss of species, especially in areas of rapid urbanization. Advanced developing countries largely resolve resource problems, although the poorest developing countries will suffer resource scarcities. In particular, water scarcities will worsen in South Asia, northern China, Middle East, and Africa. Conditions will be auspicious for rapid innovation, diffusion and implementation of IT, biotechnology, and smart materials. IT will promote productivity gains and higher levels of non-inflationary growth for many countries. Some countries will fall further behind because they lack sufficient education levels, infrastructure, and regulatory systems. US global leadership and economic power, further liberalization of trade, broad acceptance of market reforms, rapid diffusion of IT, and absence of great-power conflict will generate on average % annual global economic growth. Emerging markets China, India, Brazil and many developing countries will benefit. Some states in Africa, the Middle East, Andean region, Central Asia, and the Caucasus will lag. Ethnic heterogeneity challenges cohesion of some states, migrant workers create chronic tensions in ethnically homogeneous Europe and East Asia, and communal tensions and violence increase in developing countries with poor governance. In many states benefiting from rapid economic growth and spread of IT, functions of governance will diffuse widely from national governments to local governments and partnerships with business firms, non-profits. Some states capacity to govern will weaken, and especially in the Andean region, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Central and South Asia. Absence of great power conflict. Conflict is minimal between and within developed and emerging market countries, due to economic prosperity and growing acceptance of democratic norms. Internal and cross-border conflicts persist in Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of Central, South, and Southeast Asia, and the Andean region due to lack of effective governance and countries inability to handle population growth, resources scarcities, ethnic tensions, and urbanization. Developed countries will allow many strategically remote conflicts to proceed without attempting to intervene. Scenario: Pernicious Globalization Additional billion people prove burdensome, since economic stagnation and high unemployment prevent absorption of new job market entrants or migrants. Inadequate urban infrastructure and social services in most cities create conditions ripe for instability and insurgency. South North migration becomes major source of tension, spurring US and Europe to disengage from developing countries. Population growth will contribute to scarcities of arable land and fresh water, exacerbated by inappropriate policies of subsidy and protectionism. Resource scarcities, particularly that of fresh water, will be major problems in both emerging market and developing countries, reducing agricultural production and spurring migration to cities. Innovation and diffusion will be slow, due to economic stagnation and political uncertainties. The destabilizing effects of technology will predominate: WMD proliferates; IT empowers terrorists and criminals. Benefits of technology will be realized by only a few rich countries, while most countries will fall further behind. A US downturn leads to economic stagnation. Global consensus supporting market reforms will erode, undermining the "American economic model," making US especially vulnerable and leading US to disengage from global involvement. Emerging markets, as well as most developing countries, are hard hit by economic stagnation. Ethnic/religious identities sharpen in many heterogeneous states. Communal tensions and violence increase in Africa, Central and South Asia, and parts of Middle East. Political Islam grows. Likelihood of terrorism against targets linked to globalization and the US will increase, hastening Northern disengagement. Weakening of governing capacity at all levels among both developed and developing countries; China and Russia face territorial fragmentation. Risk of regional conflict in Asia rises substantially. Serious questions arise concerning: China s territorial integrity. India s ability to govern. Future of democracy in Russia. Frequency of internal and interstate conflicts increases, triggered by rising tensions in emerging and developing countries and reduced cooperation among developed countries. WMD restraints will erode, increasing risks of terrorism and regional aggression. DI Design Center AI - Population Resources Technology Economy Identity and Governance Conflict Driver Behavior in the Global Futures Scenarios (continued) Scenario: Regional Competition Additional billion people prove burdensome for many developing countries, due to slow economic growth and regional protectionism. Cities in many developing countries become unstable, due to growing economic disparities, inadequate infrastructure and services, and weak governance: increasing cross-border migration. Population growth, economic pressures, and policy failures create resource scarcities, especially in poor countries and highly populated emerging markets. International environmental collaboration weakens, and local conflicts over water spur cross-border migration. Technology advances and commercializes rapidly, but regional protectionism reduces economies of scale and promotes trade barriers. Conflicts over market openings for high technology sectors break out. Developing countries unable to compete in global economy fall into technological backwardness. Growth is robust, but diminished by effects of regionalism and protectionism. US maintains advantage over Europe and Japan through ability to absorb foreign workers. Emerging markets are targets of developed country mercantilist competition. Other developing countries are neglected by rich countries and atrophied global institutions. Globalization, assertions of US "hegemony," and cultural changes challenge national identities, contributing to US-European and US- Asian estrangement and increasing US engagement in Latin America. Labor mobility sharpens ethnic/religious identities in countries where immigrants cannot be absorbed. Communal pressures in developing countries increase, in some cases leading to internal communal conflicts. Mercantilist competition strengthens the state. A number of regional organizations are strengthened while global institutions weaken, due to inattention, preoccupation with domestic/regional issues, and EU/Japan resentment of US preeminence. Increased regionalism results in conflict over markets, investment flows, and resources, further reducing international collaboration on terrorism, crime, cross-border conflicts, and WMD proliferation. WMD proliferates rapidly and dangerously. High levels of internal and cross-border conflicts persist in developing countries. Scenario: Post-Polar World Additional billion people destabilizing some countries, such as Indonesia, and make some rapidly growing cities ungovernable. Population dynamics create opportunities for China and emerging market countries of Latin America and contribute to reordering of great-power relationships in Asia. Resource trends similar to those in regional competition scenario. Widespread regional protectionism and conflicts over access to high technology develop. Regional and great-power relations in Asia become more contentious. Demand for militarily-relevant technologies in Asia increases. Economic trends similar to those in regional competition scenario. Globalization and cultural changes contribute to US European estrangement and increase US engagement in Latin America. Traditional national identities and rivalries stoke intensified nationalism in Asia. Labor mobility sharpens ethnic/religious identities in countries where immigrants cannot be absorbed. Communal pressures increase in many developing countries, and conflicts persist in the Andean region, Indonesia, and elsewhere. Both mercantilist competition and a growing prospect of interstate conflict in Asia strengthen developed and emerging market states ability to command resources, invest in militarily-relevant technology, and control borders. Both global and regional intergovernmental institutions weaken. As US concentrates on Western Hemisphere and downgrades its presence in Europe and Asia, China drives towards regional dominance, Japan rearms and the risk of great-power conflict increases as US contemplates reasserting influence in Asia. WMD proliferates rapidly and dangerously, particularly in Asia. High levels of internal and cross-border conflicts persist in developing countries. DI Design Center AI - The National Intelligence Council The National Intelligence Council (NIC) manages the Intelligence Community s estimative process, incorporating the best available expertise inside and outside the government. It reports to the Director of Central Intelligence in his capacity as head of the US Intelligence Community and speaks authorita- tively on substantive issues for the Community as a whole. Chairman (concurrently AssistantDirector of Central Intelligence for Analysis and Production) John Gannon Vice Chairman Ellen Laipson Director, Senior Review, Production, and Analysis Stuart A. Cohen National Intelligence Of cers Africa Robert Houdek At-Large Stuart A. Cohen Conventional Military Issues John Landry East Asia Robert Sutter Economics & Global Issues David Gordon Europe Barry F. Lowenkron Latin America Fulton T. Armstrong Near East and South Asia Paul Pillar Russia and Eurasia George Kolt Science & Technology Lawrence Gershwin Strategic & Nuclear Programs Robert D Walpole Warning Robert Vickers Unclassi ed