NIE - D January The Global Infectious Disease Threat and Its Implications for the United States Preface The Global Infectious Disease Threat and Its Implications for the United States I am pleased to share with you this unclassi ed version of a new National Intelligence Estimate on the reemergence of the threat from infectious diseases worldwide and its implications for the United States. This report represents an important initiative on the part of the Intelligence Community to consider the national security dimension of a nontraditional threat. It responds to a growing concern by senior US leaders about the implications in terms of health, economics, and national security of the growing global infectious disease threat. The dramatic increase in drug- resistant microbes, combined with the lag in development of new antibiot- ics, the rise of megacities with severe health care de ciencies, environmen- tal degradation, and the growing ease and frequency of cross-border movements of people and produce have greatly facilitated the spread of infectious diseases. In June , President Clinton issued a Presidential Decision Directive calling for a more focused US policy on infectious diseases. The State Department s Strategic Plan for International Affairs lists protecting human health and reducing the spread of infectious diseases as US strategic goals, and Secretary Albright in December announced the second of two major U.S. initiatives to combat HIV/AIDS. The unprecedented UN Secu- rity Council session devoted exclusively to the threat to Africa from HIV/ AIDS in January is a measure of the international community s con- cern about the infectious disease threat. As part of this new US Government effort, the National Intelligence Coun- cil produced this National Intelligence Estimate. It examines the most lethal diseases globally and by region; develops alternative scenarios about their future course; examines national and international capacities to deal with them; and assesses their national and global social, economic, politi- cal, and security impact. It then assesses the infectious disease threat from international sources to the United States; to US military personnel over- seas; and to regions in which the United States has or may develop signi - cant equities. The Estimate was produced under the auspices of David F. Gordon, National Intelligence Of cer for Economics and Global Issues. The pri- mary drafters were Lt. Col. (Dr.) Don Noah of the Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center and George Fidas of the NIC. The Estimate also bene- ted from a conference on infectious diseases held jointly with the State Department s Bureau of Intelligence and Research, and was reviewed by several prominent epidemiologists and other health experts in and outside the US Government. We hope that it will further inform the debate about this important subject. John C. Gannon Chairman, National Intelligence Council Contents Page Preface Key Judgments Discussion Patterns of Infectious Diseases Factors Affecting Growth and Spread Regional Trends and Response Capacity International Response Capacity Alternative Scenarios and Outlook for Infectious Diseases Economic, Social, and Political Impacts Infectious Diseases and US National Security Key Judgments The Global Infectious Disease Threat and Its Implications for the United States New and reemerging infectious diseases will pose a rising global health threat and will complicate US and global security over the next years. These diseases will endanger US citizens at home and abroad, threaten US armed forces deployed overseas, and exacerbate social and political insta- bility in key countries and regions in which the United States has signi - cant interests. Infectious diseases are a leading cause of death, accounting for a quarter to a third of the estimated million deaths worldwide in . The spread of infectious diseases results as much from changes in human behavior including lifestyles and land use patterns, increased trade and travel, and inappropriate use of antibiotic drugs as from mutations in pathogens. Twenty well-known diseases including tuberculosis (TB), malaria, and cholera have reemerged or spread geographically since , often in more virulent and drug-resistant forms. At least previously unknown disease agents have been identi ed since , including HIV, Ebola, hepatitis C, and Nipah virus, for which no cures are available. Of the seven biggest killers worldwide, TB, malaria, hepatitis, and, in particular, HIV/AIDS continue to surge, with HIV/AIDS and TB likely to account for the overwhelming majority of deaths from infectious diseases in developing countries by . Acute lower respiratory infections including pneumonia and in uenza as well as diarrheal diseases and measles, appear to have peaked at high incidence levels. Impact Within the United States Although the infectious disease threat in the United States remains rela- tively modest as compared to that of noninfectious diseases, the trend is up. Annual infectious disease-related death rates in the United States have nearly doubled to some , annually after reaching an historic low in . Many infectious diseases most recently, the West Nile virus orig- inate outside US borders and are introduced by international travelers, immigrants, returning US military personnel, or imported animals and foodstuffs. In the opinion of the US Institute of Medicine, the next major infectious disease threat to the United States may be, like HIV, a previously unrecognized pathogen. Barring that, the most dangerous known infectious diseases likely to threaten the United States over the next two decades will be HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C, TB, and new, more lethal variants of in uenza. Hospital-acquired infections and foodborne illnesses also will pose a threat. Although multidrug therapies have cut HIV/AIDS deaths by two-thirds to , annually since , emerging microbial resistance to such drugs and continued new infections will sustain the threat. Some million Americans are chronic carriers of the hepatitis C virus, a signi cant cause of liver cancer and cirrhosis. The US death toll from the virus may surpass that of HIV/AIDS in the next ve years. TB, exacerbated by multidrug resistant strains and HIV/AIDS co-infec- tion, has made a comeback. Although a massive and costly control effort is achieving considerable success, the threat will be sustained by the spread of HIV and the growing number of new, particularly illegal, immigrants infected with TB. In uenza now kills some , Americans annually, and epidemiolo- gists generally agree that it is not a question of whether, but when, the next killer pandemic will occur. Highly virulent and increasingly antimicrobial resistant pathogens, such as Staphylococcus aureus, are major sources of hospital-acquired infec- tions that kill some , patients annually. The doubling of US food imports over the last ve years is one of the factors contributing to tens of millions of foodborne illnesses and , deaths that occur annually, and the trend is up. Regional Trends Developing and former communist countries will continue to experience the greatest impact from infectious diseases because of malnutrition, poor sanitation, poor water quality, and inadequate health care but devel- oped countries also will be affected: Sub-Saharan Africa accounting for nearly half of infectious disease deaths globally will remain the most vulnerable region. The death rates for many diseases, including HIV/AIDS and malaria, exceed those in all other regions. Sub-Saharan Africa s health care capacity the poorest in the world will continue to lag. Asia and the Paci c, where multidrug resistant TB, malaria, and cholera are rampant, is likely to witness a dramatic increase in infectious disease deaths, largely driven by the spread of HIV/AIDS in South and Southeast Asia and its likely spread to East Asia. By , the region could surpass Africa in the number of HIV infections. The former Soviet Union (FSU) and, to a lesser extent, Eastern Europe also are likely to see a substantial increase in infectious disease incidence and deaths. In the FSU especially, the steep deterioration in health care and other services owing to economic decline has led to a sharp rise in diphtheria, dysentery, cholera, and hepatitis B and C. TB has reached epi- demic proportions throughout the FSU, while the HIV-infected popula- tion in Russia alone could exceed million by the end of and double yet again by . Latin American countries generally are making progress in infectious disease control, including the eradication of polio, but uneven economic development has contributed to widespread resurgence of cholera, malaria, TB, and dengue. These diseases will continue to take a heavy toll in tropical and poorer countries. The Middle East and North Africa region has substantial TB and hepa- titis B and C prevalence, but conservative social mores, climatic factors, and the high level of health spending in the oil-producing states tend to limit some globally prevalent diseases, such as HIV/AIDS and malaria. The region has the lowest HIV infection rate among all regions, although this is probably due in part to above-average underreporting because of the stigma associated with the disease in Muslim societies. Western Europe faces threats from several infectious diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, TB, and hepatitis B and C, as well as from several economi- cally costly zoonotic diseases (that is, those transmitted from animals to humans). The region s large volume of travel, trade, and immigration increases the risks of importing diseases from other regions, but its highly developed health care system will limit their impact. Response Capacity Development of an effective global surveillance and response system prob- ably is at least a decade or more away, owing to inadequate coordination and funding at the international level and lack of capacity, funds, and com- mitment in many developing and former communist states. Although over- all global health care capacity has improved substantially in recent decades, the gap between rich and poorer countries in the availability and quality of health care, as illustrated by a typology developed by the Defense Intelligence Agency s Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center (AFMIC), is widening. Alternative Scenarios We have examined three plausible scenarios for the course of the infectious disease threat over the next years: Steady Progress The least likely scenario projects steady progress whereby the aging of glo- bal populations and declining fertility rates, socioeconomic advances, and improvements in health care and medical breakthroughs hasten movement toward a health transition in which such noninfectious diseases as heart disease and cancer would replace infectious diseases as the overarching global health challenge. We believe this scenario is unlikely primarily because it gives inadequate emphasis to persistent demographic and socio- economic challenges in the developing countries, to increasing microbial resistance to existing antibiotics, and because related models have already underestimated the force of major killers such as HIV/AIDS, TB, and malaria. Progress Stymied A more pessimistic and more plausible scenario projects little or no progress in countering infectious diseases over the duration of this Esti- mate. Under this scenario, HIV/AIDS reaches catastrophic proportions as the virus spreads throughout the vast populations of India, China, the former Soviet Union, and Latin America, while multidrug treatments encounter microbial resistance and remain prohibitively expensive for developing countries. Multidrug resistant strains of TB, malaria, and other infectious diseases appear at a faster pace than new drugs and vaccines, wreaking havoc on world health. Although more likely than the steady progress scenario, we judge that this scenario also is unlikely to prevail because it underestimates the prospects for socioeconomic development, international collaboration, and medical and health care advances to con- strain the spread of at least some widespread infectious diseases. Deterioration, Then Limited Improvement The most likely scenario, in our view, is one in which the infectious disease threat particularly from HIV/AIDS worsens during the rst half of our time frame, but decreases tfully after that, owing to better prevention and control efforts, new drugs and vaccines, and socioeconomic improvements. In the next decade, under this scenario, negative demographic and social conditions in developing countries, such as continued urbanization and poor health care capacity, remain conducive to the spread of infectious dis- eases; persistent poverty sustains the least developed countries as reservoirs of infection; and microbial resistance continues to increase faster than the pace of new drug and vaccine development. During the subsequent decade, more positive demographic changes such as reduced fertility and aging populations; gradual socioeconomic improvement in most countries; medi- cal advances against childhood and vaccine-preventable killers such as diarrheal diseases, neonatal tetanus, and measles; expanded international surveillance and response systems; and improvements in national health care capacities take hold in all but the least developed countries. Barring the appearance of a deadly and highly infectious new disease, a cata- strophic upward lurch by HIV/AIDS, or the release of a highly contagious biological agent capable of rapid and widescale secondary spread, these developments produce at least limited gains against the overall infectious disease threat. However, the remaining group of virulent diseases, led by HIV/AIDS and TB, continue to take a signi cant toll. Economic, Social, and Political Impact The persistent infectious disease burden is likely to aggravate and, in some cases, may even provoke economic decay, social fragmentation, and politi- cal destabilization in the hardest hit countries in the developing and former communist worlds, especially in the worst case scenario outlined above: The economic costs of infectious diseases especially HIV/AIDS and malaria are already signi cant, and their increasingly heavy toll on pro- ductivity, pro tability, and foreign investment will be re ected in grow- ing GDP losses, as well, that could reduce GDP by as much as percent or more by in some Sub-Saharan African countries, according to recent studies. Some of the hardest hit countries in Sub-Saharan Africa and possibly later in South and Southeast Asia will face a demographic upheaval as HIV/AIDS and associated diseases reduce human life expectancy by as much as years and kill as many as a quarter of their populations over a decade or less, producing a huge orphan cohort. Nearly million chil- dren in countries will lose one or both parents to AIDS by ; of the hardest hit countries will be in Sub-Saharan Africa. The relationship between disease and political instability is indirect but real. A wide-ranging study on the causes of state instability suggests that infant mortality a good indicator of the overall quality of life correlates strongly with political instability, particularly in countries that already have achieved a measure of democracy. The severe social and economic impact of infectious diseases is likely to intensify the struggle for political power to control scarce state resources. Implications for US National Security As a major hub of global travel, immigration, and commerce with wide- ranging interests and a large civilian and military presence overseas, the United States and its equities abroad will remain at risk from infectious diseases. Emerging and reemerging infectious diseases, many of which are likely to continue to originate overseas, will continue to kill at least , Americans annually. Many more could perish in an epidemic of in uenza or yet-unknown disease or if there is a substantial decline in the effective- ness of available HIV/AIDS drugs. Infectious diseases are likely to continue to account for more military hospital admissions than battle eld injuries. US military personnel deployed at NATO and US bases overseas, will be at low-to-moderate risk. At highest risk will be US military forces deployed in support of humanitarian and peacekeeping operations in developing countries. The infectious disease burden will weaken the military capabilities of some countries as well as international peacekeeping efforts as their armies and recruitment pools experience HIV infection rates ranging from to percent. The cost will be highest among of cers and the more modernized militaries in Sub-Saharan Africa and increasingly among FSU states and possibly some rogue states. Infectious diseases are likely to slow socioeconomic development in the hardest-hit developing and former communist countries and regions. This will challenge democratic development and transitions and possibly con- tribute to humanitarian emergencies and civil con icts. Infectious disease-related embargoes and restrictions on travel and immi- gration will cause frictions among and between developed and develop- ing countries. The probability of a bioterrorist attack against US civilian and military personnel overseas or in the United States also is likely to grow as more states and groups develop a biological warfare capability. Although there is no evidence that the recent West Nile virus outbreak in New York City was caused by foreign state or nonstate actors, the scare and several ear- lier instances of suspected bioterrorism showed the confusion and fear they can sow regardless of whether or not they are validated. Discussion The Global Infectious Disease Threat and Its Implications for the United States Patterns of Infectious Diseases Broad advances in controlling or eradicating a growing number of infectious diseases such as tuberculosis (TB), malaria, and smallpox in the decades after the Second World War fueled hopes that the global infectious disease threat would be increasingly manageable. Opti- mism regarding the battle against infectious diseases peaked in when the United Nations (UN) member states signed the Health for All accord, which predicted that even the poorest nations would undergo a health transition before the millennium, whereby infectious diseases no longer would pose a major danger to human health. As recently as , a World Bank/World Health Organization (WHO) sponsored study by Christopher J.L. Murray and Alan D. Lopez projected a dramatic reduction in the infectious disease threat. This optimism, however, led to complacency and overlooked the role of such factors as expanded trade and travel and grow- ing microbial resistance to existing antibiotics in the spread of infectious diseases. Today: Infectious diseases remain a leading cause of death (see gure ). Of the estimated mil- lion deaths worldwide in , about one- fourth to one-third were due to infectious dis- eases, most of them in developing countries and among children globally. Infectious diseases accounted for percent of the global disease burden measured in terms of Disability-Adjusted Life Years (DALYS) that gauge the impact of both deaths and disabilities, as compared to percent for noninfectious diseases and percent for injuries. Although there has been continuing progress in controlling some vaccine-preventable childhood diseases such as polio, neonatal tetanus, and measles, a White House appointed interagency working group identi- ed at least previously unknown diseases that have appeared globally since , many of them incurable, including HIV/AIDS, Ebola hemorrhagic fever, and hepatitis C. Most recently, Nipah encephalitis was identi- ed. Twenty well-known diseases such as malaria, TB, cholera, and dengue have rebounded after a period of decline or spread to new regions, often in deadlier forms (see table ). These trends are re ected in the United States as well, where annual infectious disease deaths have nearly doubled to some , since after reaching historic lows that year, while new and existing pathogens, such as HIV and West Nile virus, respectively, continue to enter US borders. The Deadly Seven The seven infectious diseases that caused the highest number of deaths in , according to WHO and DIA s Armed Forces Medical Intelli- gence Center (AFMIC), will remain threats well into the next century. HIV/AIDS, TB, malaria, and hepatitis B and C are either spreading or becoming more drug-resistant, while lower respiratory infections, diarrheal diseases, and measles, appear to have at least temporarily peaked (see gure ). HIV/AIDS. Following its identi cation in , the spread of HIV intensi ed quickly. Despite progress in some regions, HIV/AIDS shows no signs of abating globally (see gure ). Approximately . million people died from AIDS worldwide in , up dramatically from . million in , and there were . million new infections. According to WHO, some . million people were living with HIV by , up from million in , and the number could approach million by the end of . Source: US Institute of Medicine, ; WHO, . Table Examples of Pathogenic Microbes and the Diseases They Cause, Identi ed Since Year Microbe Type Disease Rotavirus Virus Infantile diarrhea Ebola virus Virus Acute hemorrhagic fever Legionella pneumophila Bacterium Legionnaires disease Human T-lymphotrophic virus I (HTLV ) Virus T-cell lymphoma/leukemia Toxin-producing Staphylococcus aureus Bacterium Toxic shock syndrome Escherichia coli O :H Bacterium Hemorrhagic colitis; hemolytic uremic syndrome Borrelia burgdorferi Bacterium Lyme disease Human Immunode ciency Virus (HIV) Virus Acquired Immuno-De ciency Syndrome (AIDS) Helicobacter pylori Bacterium Peptic ulcer disease Hepatitis C Virus Parentally transmitted non-A, non-B liver infection Vibrio cholerae O Bacterium New strain associated with epidemic cholera Hantavirus Virus Adult respiratory distress syndrome Cryptosporidium Protozoa Enteric disease Ehrlichiosis Bacterium Severe arthritis? nvCJD Prion New variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease HVN Virus In uenza Nipah Virus Severe encephalitis Although infection and death rates have slowed considerably in developed countries owing to the growing use of preventive measures and costly new multidrug treatment therapies, the pandemic continues to spread in much of the developing world, where percent of global infections and deaths have occurred. Sub- Saharan Africa currently has the biggest regional burden, but the disease is spreading quickly in India, Russia, China, and much of the rest of Asia. HIV/AIDS probably will cause more deaths than any other single infectious disease worldwide by and may account for up to one-half or more of infectious disease deaths in the developing world alone. TB. WHO declared TB a global emergency in and the threat continues to grow, espe- cially from multidrug resistant TB (see gure ). The disease is especially prevalent in Rus- sia, India, Southeast Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and parts of Latin America. More than . mil- lion people died of TB in , excluding those infected with HIV/AIDS, and there were up to . million new cases. Although the vast major- ity of TB infections and deaths occur in devel- oping regions, the disease also is encroaching into developed regions due to increased immi- gration and travel and less emphasis on preven- tion. Drug resistance is a growing problem; the WHO has reported that up to percent of peo- ple with multidrug resistant TB may die of their infection despite treatment, which can be to times more expensive than that used for drug-sensitive TB. HIV/AIDS also has contrib- uted to the resurgence of TB. One-quarter of the increase in TB incidence involves co-infec- tion with HIV. TB probably will rank second only to HIV/AIDS as a cause of infectious dis- ease deaths by . A Word About Data All data concerning global disease inci- dence, including WHO data, should be treated as broadly indicative of trends rather than accurate measures of disease preva- lence. Much disease incidence in developing countries, in particular, is either unreported or under-reported due to a lack of adequate medical and administrative personnel, the stigma associated with many diseases, or the reluctance of countries to incur the trade, tourism, and other losses that such revela- tions might produce. Since much morbidity and mortality are multicausal, moreover, diagnosis and reporting of diseases can vary and further distort comparisons. WHO and other international entities are dependent on such data despite its weaknesses and are often forced to extrapolate or build models based on relatively small samples, as in the case of HIV/AIDS. Changes in methodolo- gies, moreover, can produce differing results. The ranking of AIDS mortality ahead of TB mortality in gure , for example, partly owes to the fact that HIV-positive individuals dying of TB were included in the AIDS mortality category in the most recent WHO survey. Malaria, a mainly tropical disease that seemed to be coming under control in the s and s, is making a deadly comeback especially in Sub-Saharan Africa where infec- tion rates increased by percent from to (see gure ). Drug resistance, histori- cally a problem only with the most severe form of the disease, is now increasingly reported in the milder variety, while the prospects for an effective vaccine are poor. In , an esti- mated million people were infected with malaria, and more than . million died from the disease that year. Most of the deaths occurred in Sub-Saharan Africa. According to the US Agency for International Development (USAID), Sub-Saharan Africa alone is likely to experience a - to -percent annual increase in malaria-related deaths and severe illnesses over the next several years. Hepatitis B and C. Hepatitis B, which caused at least . million deaths in , is highly endemic in the developing world, and some million people worldwide are chronic carriers (see gure ). The less prevalent but far more lethal hepatitis C identi ed in has grown dramatically and is a signi cant contributor to cirrhosis and liver cancer. WHO estimated that percent of the global population was infected with the hepatitis C virus by (see gure ), which means that more than million people were at risk of developing the diseases associated with this virus. Various studies project that up to percent of people with chronic hepatitis B and C will die of cirrhosis of the liver and liver cancer over the next to years. Lower respiratory infections, especially in u- enza and pneumonia, killed . million people in , most of them children in developing countries, down from . million in . Owing to immunosuppression from malnutri- tion and growing microbial resistance to com- monly used drugs such as penicillin, these Glossary Infectious Disease An illness due to a speci c infectious agent that is spread from an infected per- son, animal, or inanimate reservoir to a susceptible host, either directly or indi- rectly, through an intermediate plant or animal host, vector, or the inanimate envi- ronment. Endemic The constant presence of a disease or infectious agent within a given geographic area. Epidemic The occurrence in an area of a disease or illness in excess of what may be expected on the basis of past experience for a given population (in the case of a new disease, such as AIDS, any occurrence may be con- sidered epidemic ). Pandemic A worldwide epidemic affecting an excep- tionally high proportion of the global pop- ulation. Prevalence The number of existing cases of a disease among a total or speci ed population in a given period of time; usually expressed as a percent or as the number of cases per thousand, , , and so forth. children are especially vulnerable to such dis- eases and will continue to experience high death rates. Diarrheal diseases mainly spread by contaminated water or food accounted for . million deaths in , as compared to million in , of which about percent occurred among children under ve years of age in developing countries. The most common cause of death related to diarrheal diseases is infection with Escherichia coli. Other diarrheal diseases include cholera, dysentery, and rotavi- ral diarrhea, prevalent throughout the develop- ing world and, more recently, in many former communist states. Such waterborne and food- borne diseases will remain highly prevalent in these regions in the absence of improvements in water quality and sanitation. Measles. Despite substantial progress against measles in recent years, the disease still infects some million children annually and killed about . million in , down from . mil- lion in . It is a leading cause of death among refugees and internally displaced per- sons during complex humanitarian emergen- cies. Measles will continue to pose a major threat in developing countries (see gure ), particularly Sub-Saharan Africa, until the still relatively low vaccination rates are substan- tially increased. It also will continue to cause periodic epidemics in areas such as South America with higher, but still inadequate, vac- cination rates. Factors Affecting Growth and Spread With few exceptions, the resurgence of the infectious disease threat is due as much to dra- matic changes in human behavior and broader social, economic, and technological develop- ments as to mutations in pathogens (see table ). Changes in human behavior include popula- tion dislocations, living styles, and sexual prac- tices; technology-driven medical procedures entailing some risks of infection; and land use patterns. They also include rising international travel and commerce that hasten the spread of infectious diseases; inappropriate use of antibi- otics that leads to the development of microbial resistance; and the breakdown of public health systems in some countries owing to war or eco- nomic decline. In addition, climate changes enable diseases and vectors to expand their range. Several of these factors interact, exacer- bating the spread of infectious diseases. Human Demographics and Behavior Population growth and urbanization, particu- larly in the developing world, will continue to facilitate the transfer of pathogens among peo- ple and regions. Frequent and often sudden population movements within and across bor- ders caused by ethnic con ict, civil war, and famine will continue to spread diseases rapidly in affected areas, particularly among refugees. As of , there were some major humanitarian emergencies worldwide involving at least million refugees and inter- nally displaced people. Refugee camps, found Source: Adapted from US Institute of Medicine, . Table Factors Contributing to Infectious Disease Reemergence and Associated Diseases Contributing Factor(s) Associated Infectious Diseases Human demographics and behavior Dengue/dengue hemorrhagic fever, sexually transmitted diseases, giardiasis Technology and industry Toxic shock syndrome, noso- comial (hospital-acquired) infections, hemorrhagic colitis/hemolytic uremic syndrome Economic development and land use Lyme disease, malaria, plague, rabies, yellow fever, Rift Valley fever, schistosomiasis International travel and commerce Malaria, cholera, pneumococ- cal pneumonia Microbial adaptation and change In uenza, HIV/AIDS, malaria, Staphylococcus aureus infections Breakdown of public health measures Rabies, tuberculosis, trench fever, diphtheria, whooping cough (pertussis), cholera Climate change Malaria, dengue, cholera, yellow fever mainly in Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, facilitate the spread of TB, HIV, cholera, dysentery, and malaria. Well over million people lived outside the country of their birth in , and millions more will emigrate annu- ally, increasing the spread of diseases globally. Behavioral patterns, such as unprotected sex with multiple partners and intravenous drug use, will remain key factors in the spread of HIV/AIDS. Technology, Medicine, and Industry Although technological breakthroughs will greatly facilitate the detection, diagnosis, and control of certain infectious and noninfectious illnesses, they also will introduce new dangers, especially in the developed world where they are used extensively. Invasive medical proce- dures will result in a variety of hospital- acquired infections, such as Staphylococcus aureus. The globalization of the food supply means that nonhygienic food production, prep- aration, and handling practices in originating countries can introduce pathogens endangering foreign as well as local populations. Disease outbreaks due to Cyclospora spp, Escherichia coli, and Salmonella spp. in several countries, along with the emergence, primarily in Britain, of Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy, or mad cow disease, and the related new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (nvCJD) affecting humans, result from such food practices. Economic Development and Land Use Changes in land and water use patterns will remain major factors in the spread of infectious diseases. The emergence of Lyme disease in the United States and Europe has been linked to reforestation and increases in the deer tick pop- ulation, which acts as a vector, while conver- sion of grasslands to farming in Asia encourages the growth of rodent populations carrying hemorrhagic fever and other viral dis- eases. Human encroachment on tropical forests will bring populations into closer proximity with insects and animals carrying diseases such as leishmaniasis, malaria, and yellow fever, as well as heretofore unknown and potentially dangerous diseases, as was the case with HIV/ AIDS. Close contact between humans and ani- mals in the context of farming will increase the incidence of zoonotic diseases those trans- mitted from animals to humans. Water manage- ment efforts, such as dambuilding, will encourage the spread of water-breeding vectors such as mosquitoes and snails that have con- tributed to outbreaks of Rift Valley fever and schistosomiasis in Africa. International Travel and Commerce The increase in international air travel, trade, and tourism will dramatically increase the pros- pects that infectious disease pathogens such as in uenza and vectors such as mosquitoes and rodents will spread quickly around the globe, often in less time than the incubation period of most diseases. Earlier in the decade, for exam- ple, a multidrug resistant strain of Streptococ- cus pneumoniae originating in Spain spread throughout the world in a matter of weeks, according to the director of WHO s infectious disease division. The cross-border movement of some million people each day, including million between developed and developing countries each week, and surging global trade ensure that travel and commerce will remain key factors in the spread of infectious diseases. Microbial Adaptation and Resistance Infectious disease microbes are constantly evolving, oftentimes into new strains that are increasingly resistant to available antibiotics. As a result, an expanding number of strains of diseases such as TB, malaria, and pneumo- nia will remain dif cult or virtually impossi- ble to treat. At the same time, large-scale use of antibiotics in both humans and livestock will continue to encourage development of micro- bial resistance. The rstline drug treatment for malaria is no longer effective in over of the countries where the disease is a major health problem. Penicillin has substantially lost its effectiveness against several diseases, such as pneumonia, meningitis, and gonorrhea, in many countries. Eighty percent of Staphylococ- cus aureus isolates in the United States, for example, are penicillin-resistant and percent are methicillin-resistant. A US Centers for Dis- ease Control and Prevention (USCDC) study found a -fold increase in high-level resis- tance to penicillin among one group of Strepto- coccus pneumoniae cases in the United States and signi cant resistance to multidrug therapy as well. In uenza viruses, in particular, are par- ticularly ef cient in their ability to survive and genetically change, sometimes into deadly strains. HIV also displays a high rate of genetic mutation that will present signi cant problems in the development of an effective vaccine or new, affordable therapies. Note: Antimicrobial resistance occurs when a disease-carrying microbe (bacteria, virus, parasite, or fungus) is no longer affected by a drug that previously was able to kill the microbe or prevent it from growing. Even among populations of microorganisms that are susceptible to a particular antimicrobial agent, at least a small percentage of those organisms are naturally resistant, and their proportion will grow as the others succumb to the antimicrobial agent. Eventually this process renders the agent ineffective against the microorganism. Source: US Institute of Medicine, ; WHO, . Table Examples of Drug-Resistant Infectious Agents and Percentage of Infections That Are Drug Resistant, by Country or Region Pathogen Drug Country/Region Percentage of Drug-Resistant Infections Streptococcus pneumoniae Penicillin United States Asia, Chile, Spain, Hungary to Staphylococcus aureus Methicillin Multidrug United States Japan Mycobacterium tuberculosis Any drug Any drug Multidrug United States New York City Eastern Europe Plasmodium falciparum malaria Chloroquine Mephloquine Kenya Ghana Zimbabwe Burkina Faso Thailand Shigella dysenteride Multidrug Burundi, Rwanda Breakdown in Public Health Care Alone or in combination, war and natural disas- ters, economic collapse, and human compla- cency are causing a breakdown in health care delivery and facilitating the emergence or reemergence of infectious diseases. While Sub- Saharan Africa is the area currently most affected by these factors, economic problems in Russia and other former communist states are creating the context for a large increase in infectious diseases. The deterioration of basic health care services largely accounts for the reemergence of diphtheria and other vaccine- preventable diseases, as well as TB, as funds for vaccination, sanitation, and water puri ca- tion have dried up. In developed countries, past inroads against infectious diseases led to a relaxation of preventive measures such as sur- veillance and vaccination. Inadequate infection control practices in hospitals will remain a major source of disease transmission in devel- oping and developed countries alike. Climate Change Climatic shifts are likely to enable some dis- eases and associated vectors particularly mosquito-borne diseases such as malaria, yel- low fever, and dengue to spread to new areas. Warmer temperatures and increased rainfall already have expanded the geographic range of malaria to some highland areas in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America and could add sev- eral million more cases in developing country regions over the next two decades. The occur- rence of waterborne diseases associated with temperature-sensitive environments, such as cholera, also is likely to increase. Regional Trends and Response Capacity The overall level of global health care capacity has improved substantially in recent decades, but in most poorer countries the availability of various types of health care ranging from basic pharmaceuticals and postnatal care to costly multidrug therapies remains very lim- ited. Almost all research and development funds allocated by developed country govern- ments and pharmaceutical companies, more- over, are focused on advancing therapies and drugs relevant to developed country maladies, and those that are relevant to developing coun- try needs usually are beyond their nancial reach. This is generating a growing controversy between rich and poorer nations over such issues as intellectual property rights, as some developing countries seek to meet their phar- maceutical needs with locally produced generic products. Malnutrition, poor sanitation, and poor water quality in developing countries also will continue to add to the disease burden that is overwhelming health care infrastructures in many countries. So too, will political instability and con ict and the reluctance of many govern- ments to confront issues such as the spread of HIV/AIDS. A global composite measure of health care infrastructure devised by DIA s Armed Forces Medical Intelligence Center (AFMIC) assesses factors such as the priority attributed to health care, health expenditures, the quality of health care delivery and access to drugs, and the extent of surveillance and response systems. The AFMIC typology high- lights the disparities in health care capacity (see gure ), as do various WHO, UNAIDS, and World Bank studies. Sub-Saharan Africa Sub-Saharan Africa will remain the region most affected by the global infectious disease phenomenon accounting for nearly half of infectious disease-caused deaths worldwide. Deaths from HIV/AIDS, malaria, cholera, and several lesser known diseases exceed those in all other regions. Sixty- ve percent of all deaths in Sub-Saharan Africa are caused by infectious diseases. Rudimentary health care delivery and response systems, the unavailabil- ity or misuse of drugs, the lack of funds, and the multiplicity of con icts are exacerbating the crisis. According to the AFMIC typology, with the exception of southern Africa, most of Sub- Saharan Africa falls in the lowest category. Investment in health care in the region is mini- mal, less than percent of the people in coun- tries such as Nigeria and the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DROC) have access to basic medical care, and even in relatively well off South Africa, only to percent have such access, with black populations at the low end of the spectrum. Four- fths of all HIV-related deaths and per- cent of new infections worldwide in occurred in the region, totaling . - million and million, respectively. Although only a tenth of the world s population lives in the region, . million of . million cumulative AIDS deaths have occurred there. Eastern and southern African countries, including South Africa, are the worst affected, with to percent of adults infected with the disease. Sub- Saharan Africa has high TB prevalence, as well as the highest HIV/TB co-infection rate, with TB deaths totaling . million in . The hardest hit countries are in equatorial and espe- cially southern Africa. South Africa, in particu- lar, is facing the biggest increase in the region. Sub-Saharan Africa accounts for an estimated percent of the global malaria burden (see gure ). Ten percent of the regional disease burden is attributed to malaria, with roughly million deaths in . Cholera, dysentery, and other diarrheal diseases also are major killers in the region, particularly among children, refu- gees, and internally displaced populations. Forty percent of all childhood deaths from diarrheal diseases occur in Sub-Saharan Africa. The region also has a high rate of hepatitis B and C infections and is the only region with a perennial meningococcal meningitis problem in a meningitis belt stretching from west to east. Sub-Saharan Africa also suffers from yel- low fever, while trypanasomiasis or sleeping sickness is making a comeback in the DROC and Sudan, and the Marburg virus also appeared in DROC for the rst time in . Ebola hemorrhagic fever strikes sporadically in countries such as the DROC, Gabon, Cote d Ivoire, and Sudan (see gure ). Asia and the Paci c Although the more developed countries of Asia and the Paci c, such as Japan, South Korea, Australia, and New Zealand, have strong records in combating infectious diseases, infec- tious disease prevalence in South and Southeast Asia is almost as high as in Sub-Saharan Africa. The health care delivery system of the Asia and Paci c region the majority of which is privately nanced is particularly vulnerable to economic downturns even though this is off- set to some degree by much of the region s reli- ance on traditional medicine from local practitioners. According to the AFMIC typol- ogy, to percent of the populations in the most developed countries, such as Japan and Australia, have access to high-quality health care. Forty to percent have such access among the large populations of China and South Asia, while southeast Asian health care is more varied, with less than percent enjoy- ing such access in Burma and Cambodia, and to percent in Thailand, Malaysia, and the Philippines. In South and Southeast Asia, reemergent diseases such as TB, malaria, chol- era, and dengue fever are rampant, while HIV/ AIDS, after a late start, is growing faster than in any other region. TB caused million deaths in the Asia and Paci c region in , more than any other sin- gle disease, with India and China accounting for two-thirds of the total. Several million new cases occur annually most in India, China and Indonesia representing as much as percent of the global TB burden. HIV/AIDS is increas- ing dramatically, especially in India, which leads the world in absolute numbers of HIV/ AIDS infections, estimated at - million. China is better off than most of the countries to its south, but it too has a growing AIDS problem, with HIV infections variously esti- mated at . - . million and spreading rapidly. Regionwide, the number of people infected with HIV could overtake Sub-Saharan Africa in absolute numbers before . There were . million new malaria infections estimated in the Asia and Paci c region in , many of them drug resistant, and , deaths due to malaria. Acute respiratory infec- tions, such as pneumonia, cause about . mil- lion childhood deaths annually over half of them in India while dengue (including den- gue hemorrhagic fever/dengue shock syn- drome) outbreaks have spread throughout the region in the last ve years. Waterborne illnesses such as dysentery and cholera also take a heavy toll in poor and crowded areas. Asian, particularly Chinese, agricultural prac- tices place farm animals, fowl, and humans in close proximity and have long facilitated the emergence of new strains of in uenza that cause global pandemics. Hepatitis B is widely prevalent in the region, while hepatitis C is prevalent in China and in parts of southeast Asia. In the newly recognized Nipah virus spread throughout pig populations in Malaysia, causing more than human deaths there and a smaller number in nearby Singapore. Latin America Latin American countries are making consider- able progress in infectious disease control, including the eradication of polio and major reductions in the incidence and death rates of measles, neonatal tetanus, some diarrheal dis- eases, and acute respiratory infections. None- theless, infectious diseases are still a major cause of illness and death in the region, and the risk of new and reemerging diseases remains substantial. Widening income disparities, peri- odic economic shocks, and rampant urbaniza- tion have disrupted disease control efforts and contributed to widespread reemergence of chol- era, malaria, TB, and dengue, especially in the poorer Central American and Caribbean coun- tries and in the Amazon basin of South America. According to the AFMIC typology, Latin America s health care capacity is sub- stantially more advanced than that of Sub- Saharan Africa and somewhat better than mainland Asia s, with to percent of populations having access to basic health care in Chile, Costa Rica, and Cuba on the upper end of the scale. Less than percent have such access in Haiti, most of Central America, and the Amazon basin countries, including the rural populations in Brazil. Cholera reemerged with a vengeance in the region in for the rst time in a century with , new cases, and while dropping to , cases in , it still comprises two- thirds of the global cholera burden. TB is a growing problem regionwide, especially in Brazil, Peru, Argentina, and the Dominican Republic where drug-resistant cases also are on the rise. Haiti does not provide data but proba- bly also has a high infection rate. HIV/AIDS also is spreading rapidly, placing Latin Amer- ica third behind Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia in HIV prevalence. Prevalence is high in Brazil and especially in the Caribbean countries (except Cuba), where percent of the popula- tion is infected. Malaria is prevalent in the Amazon basin. Dengue reemerged in the region in , and outbreaks have taken place in the last few years in most Caribbean countries and parts of South America. Hepatitis B and C prevalence is greatest in the Amazon basin, Bolivia, and Central America, while dengue hemorhagic fever is particularly prevalent in Brazil, Colombia, and Venezuela. Yellow fever has made a comeback over the last decade throughout the Amazon basin, and there have been several recent outbreaks of gastrointesti- nal disease attributed to E. coli infection in Chile and Argentina. Hemorrhagic fevers are present in almost all South American countries, and most hantavirus pulmonary syndrome occurs in the southern cone. Middle East and North Africa The region s conservative social mores, cli- matic factors, and high levels of health spend- ing in oil-producing states tend to limit some globally prevalent diseases, such as HIV/AIDS and malaria, but others, such as TB and hepati- tis B and C, are more prevalent. The region s advantages are partially offset by the impact of war-related uprooting of populations, over- crowded cities with poor refrigeration and sani- tation systems, and a dearth of water, especially clean drinking water. Health care capacity var- ies considerably within the region, according to the AFMIC typology. Israel and the Arabian Peninsula states minus Yemen are in far better shape than Iraq, Iran, Syria, and most of North Africa. Ninety to percent of the Israeli population and to percent of the Saudi population have good access to health care. Elsewhere, access ranges from less than per- cent in Yemen to to percent in the smaller Gulf states, Jordan and Tunisia, while most North African states fall into the - to -percent category. The HIV/AIDS impact is far lower than in other regions, with , cases, or . per- cent of the population, including , new cases, in . This owes in part to above-aver- age underreporting because of the stigma asso- ciated with the disease in Muslim societies and the authoritarian nature of most governments in the region. TB, including multidrug resistant varieties, is more problematic, especially in Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Libya, and Morocco, with an estimated , deaths in . Malaria is signi cant only in Iran, Iraq, and Yemen, but diarrheal and childhood diseases caused . million deaths each in . Other prominent or reemerging diseases in the region include all types of hepatitis, with Egypt reporting the highest prevalence worldwide of the C variety. Brucellosis now infects some , people; leishmaniasis and sand y fever also are endemic in the region; and various hemorrhagic fevers occur, as well. The Former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe The sharp decline in health care infrastructure in Russia and elsewhere in the former Soviet Union (FSU) and, to a lesser extent, in Eastern Europe owing to economic dif culties are causing a dramatic rise in infectious disease incidence. Death rates attributed to infectious diseases in the FSU increased percent from to , with TB accounting for a sub- stantial number of such deaths. According to the AFMIC typology, access to health care ranges from to percent in most European FSU states, including Russia and Ukraine, and from to percent in FSU states located in Central Asia. This is generally supported by WHO estimates indicating that only to percent of FSU citizens had regular access to essential drugs in , as compared to more than percent a decade earlier as health care budgets and government-provided health ser- vices were slashed. Access to health care is generally better in Eastern Europe, particularly in more developed states such as Poland, the Czech Republic, and Hungary, where it ranges from to percent, while only to per- cent have access in countries such as Bulgaria and Romania. More than percent of the pop- ulation throughout the East European region had such access in , according to WHO. Crowded living conditions are among the causes fueling a TB epidemic in the FSU, espe- cially among prison populations while surg- ing intravenous drug use and rampant prostitution are substantially responsible for a marked increase in HIV/AIDS incidence. There were , new TB infections in Russia alone in , a growing number of them mul- tidrug resistant, and nearly , deaths due to TB numbers that could increase signi - cantly following periodic releases of prisoners to relieve overcrowding. The number of new infections for the entire FSU in was , , while East European cases totaled , . More recent data indicate that the TB infection rate in Russia more than tripled from to , with , new cases reported in and the total number of cases expected to reach million by . After a slow and late start, HIV/AIDS is spreading rapidly throughout the European part of the FSU beyond the original cohort of intravenous drug users, though it is not yet re ected in of cial government reporting. An estimated , people were HIV-positive in , up more than ve-fold from . Although Ukraine has been hardest hit, Russia, Belarus, and Moldova have registered major increases. Vari- ous senior Russian Health Ministry of cials predict that the HIV-positive population in Rus- sia alone could reach million by the end of and could reach million by . East European countries will fare better as renewed economic growth facilitates recovery of their health care systems and better enables them to expand preventive and treatment programs. Diphtheria reached epidemic proportions in the FSU in the rst half of the decade, owing to lapses in vaccination. Reported annual case totals grew from cases in to more than , in in Russia, with another , to , in the rest of the FSU. Chol- era and dysentery outbreaks are occurring with increasing frequency in Russian cities, such as St. Petersburg and Moscow, and elsewhere in the FSU, such as in T bilisi, owing to deterio- rating water treatment and sewerage systems. Hepatitis B and C, spread primarily by intrave- nous drug use and blood transfusions, are on the rise, especially in the non-European part of the FSU. Polio also has reappeared owing to interruptions in vaccination, with new cases in Russia in . Western Europe Western Europe faces threats from a number of emerging and reemerging infectious diseases such as HIV/AIDS, TB, and hepatitis B and C, as well as several zoonotic diseases. Its status as a hub of international travel, commerce, and immigration, moreover, dramatically increases the risks of importing new diseases from other regions. Tens of millions of West Europeans travel to developing countries annually, increasing the prospects for the importation of dangerous diseases, as demonstrated by the importation of typhoid in . Some per- cent of regional population growth in the rst half of the decade was due to immigration; legal immigrants now comprise about percent of the population, and illegal newcomers num- ber an estimated million. Nonetheless, the region s highly developed health care infra- structure and delivery system tend to limit the incidence and especially the death rates of most infectious diseases, though not the economic costs. Access to high-quality care is available throughout most of the region, although gov- ernments are beginning to limit some hereto- fore generous health bene ts, and a growing antivaccination movement in parts of Western Europe, such as Germany, is causing a rise in measles and other vaccine-preventable dis- eases. The AFMIC typology gives somewhat higher marks to northern over some southern European countries, but the region as a whole is ranked in the highest category, along with North America. After increasing sharply for most of the s and s, HIV infections, and particularly HIV/AIDS deaths, have slowed considerably owing to behavioral changes among high-risk populations and the availability and funding for multidrug treatment. Some . million people were living with HIV/AIDS in , down slightly from , the preceding year, and there were , new cases and , deaths, with prevalence somewhat higher in much of southern Europe than in the north. TB, especially its multidrug resistant strains, is on the upswing, as is co-infection with HIV, par- ticularly in the larger countries, with some , TB cases reported in . Hepatitis C prevalence is growing, especially in southern Europe. Western Europe also continues to suf- fer from several zoonotic diseases, among which is the deadly new variant Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease (nvCJD), linked to the bovine spongiform encephalopathy or mad cow dis- ease outbreak in the United Kingdom in that has since ebbed following implementation of strict control measures. Other recent disease concerns include meningococcal meningitis outbreaks in the Benelux countries and leishmaniasis-HIV co-infection, especially in southern Europe. International Response Capacity International organizations such as WHO and the World Bank, institutions in several devel- oped countries such as the US CDC, and Non- governmental Organizations (NGOs) will continue to play an important role in strength- ening both international and national surveil- lance and response systems for infectious diseases. Nonetheless, progress is likely to be slow, and development of an integrated global surveillance and response system probably is at least a decade or more away. This owes to the magnitude of the challenge; inadequate coordi- nation at the international level; and lack of funds, capacity, and, in some cases, coopera- tion and commitment at the national level. Some countries hide or understate their infec- tious disease problems for reasons of interna- tional prestige and fear of economic losses. Total international health-related aid to low- and middle-income countries some $ - bil- lion annually remains a fraction of the $ billion health bill of these countries. WHO WHO has the broadest health mandate under the UN system, including establishing health priorities, coordinating global health surveil- lance, and emergency assistance in the event of disease outbreaks. Health experts give WHO credit for major successes, such as the eradica- tion of smallpox, near eradication of polio, and substantial progress in controlling childhood diseases, and in facilitating the expansion of primary health care in developing countries. It also has come under criticism for becoming top heavy, unfocused in its mission, and overly optimistic in its health projections. WHO defenders blame continued member state parsi- mony that has kept WHO s regular biennial budget to roughly $ million for several years and forced it to rely more on voluntary contributions that often come with strings attached as the cause of its shortcomings. The election last year of Gro Harlem Bruntland as Secretary General, along with a series of reforms, including expansion of the Emerging and other Communicable Diseases Surveillance and Control (EMC) Division, has placed WHO in a better position to revitalize itself. Internal oversight and transparency have been expanded, programs and budgets are undergo- ing closer scrutiny, and management account- ability is looming larger. Bruntland has moved quickly to streamline upper-level management and has installed new top managers, mostly from outside the organization, including from the private sector. She also is working to strengthen country of ces and to make the regional of ces more responsive to central direction. WHO is increasing its focus on the ght against resurgent malaria, while a better- funded EMC is expanding efforts to establish a global surveillance and response system in cooperation with UNAIDS, UNICEF, and national entities such as the US CDC, the US DoD, and France s Pasteur Institute. Other UN Agencies Involved in Health Care WHO competes for resources with the many other UN agencies that are increas- ingly involved in health care. The United Nations Children s Fund (UNICEF) focuses on children s health. The United Nations AIDS Program (UNAIDS) focuses on improving the response capacity toward HIV/AIDS at the country, regional, and global levels in cooperation with WHO and other UN agencies. Other UN agencies involved in health care issues include the UN Development Program (UNDP); the UN Family Planning Agency (UNFPA); the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR); the UN Educational, Scienti c and Cultural Organization (UNESCO); the International Labor Organization (ILO); the Food and Agri- cultural Organization (FAO); and the World Food Program (WFP). The World Bank The growing sense that health is linked inexo- rably to socioeconomic development, has prompted the World Bank to expand its health activities. According to a study by the US Institute of Medicine, the most signi cant change in the global health arena over the past decade has been the growth in both nancial and intellectual in uence of the World Bank, whose health loans have grown to $ . billion annually, including $ million for infectious diseases. Health experts generally welcome the Bank s greater involvement in the health sector, viewing it as ef cient and responsive in areas such as health sector nancial reform. Some remain concerned that the Bank s emphasis on scal balance can sometimes have a negative health and social impact in developing coun- tries. Some developing countries resent what they perceive as the domination of Bank deci- sionmaking and priority setting by the richer countries. Nongovernmental Organizations Another major change in the global health arena over the last decade is the increasingly important role of NGOs, which provide direct assistance, including emergency shelter and aid, as well as long-term domestic health care delivery. NGOs also build community aware- ness and support for WHO and other interna- tional and bilateral surveillance and response efforts. At the same time, health experts note that NGOs, like their governmental counter- parts, are driven in part by their own self inter- ests, which sometimes con ict with those of host and donor governments. Bilateral Assistance The United States, through USAID, the CDC, the National Institutes for Health (NIH), and the Defense Department s overseas laboratories, is a major contributor to international efforts to combat infectious diseases. It is joined increas- ingly by other developed nations and regional groupings, such as the European Union (EU), that provide assistance bilaterally, as well as through international organizations and NGOs. The Field Epidemiology Training Programs run jointly by the CDC and WHO as well as the EU-US Task Force on Emerging Diseases and the US-Japan Common Scientific Agenda, are key examples of developed-country pro- grams focusing on infectious diseases. National Limitations A major obstacle to effective global surveil- lance and control of infectious diseases will continue to be poor or inaccurate national health statistical reporting by many developing countries and lack of both capacity and will to properly direct aid (see gure ) and to follow WHO and other recommended health care practices. Those areas of the world most sus- ceptible to infectious disease problems are least able to develop and maintain the sophisticated and costly communications equipment needed for effective disease surveillance and reporting. In addition to the barriers dictated by low levels of development, revealing an outbreak of a dreaded disease may harm national prestige, commerce, and tourism. For example, nearly every country initially denied or minimized the extent of the HIV/AIDS virus within its bor- ders, and even today, some countries known to have signi cant rates of HIV infection refuse to cooperate with WHO, which can only publish the information submitted by surveying nations. Only a few, such as Uganda, Senegal, and Thailand, have launched major preventa- tive efforts, while many WHO members do not even endorse AIDS education in schools. Simi- larly, some countries routinely and falsely deny the existence of cholera within their borders. Aid programs to prevent and treat infectious diseases in developing countries depend largely on indigenous health workers for their success and cannot be fielded effectively in their absence. Educational programs aimed at preventing disease exposure frequently depend on higher literacy levels and assume cultural and social factors that often are absent. Alternative Scenarios and Outlook for Infectious Diseases The impact of infectious diseases over the next years will be heavily in uenced by three sets of variables. The rst is the relationship between increasing microbial resistance and scienti c efforts to develop new antibiotics and vaccines. The second is the trajectory of devel- oping and transitional economies, especially concerning the basic quality of life of the poor- est groups in these countries. The third is the degree of success of global and national efforts to create effective systems of surveillance and response. The interplay of these drivers will determine the overall outlook. On the positive side, reduced fertility and the aging of the population, continued economic development, and improved health care capac- ity in many countries, especially the more developed, will increase the progress toward a health transition by whereby the impact of infectious diseases ebbs, as compared to noninfectious diseases. On the negative side, continued rapid population growth, urbaniza- tion, and persistent poverty in much of the developing world, and the paradox in which some aspects of socioeconomic development such as increased trade and travel actually foster the spread of infectious diseases, could slow or derail that transition. So, too, will growing microbial resistance among resurgent diseases, such as malaria and TB, and the pro- liferation or intensi cation of new ones, such as HIV/AIDS. Two scenarios one optimistic and one pessi- mistic re ect differences in the international health community concerning the global outlook for infectious diseases. We present and critically assess these scenarios, elaborate on the pessimistic scenario, and develop a third, combining some elements of each, that we judge as more likely to prevail over the period of this Estimate. The Optimistic Scenario: Steady Progress According to a key World Bank/WHO study cited earlier that articulated the optimistic scenario, a health transition resulting from key drivers, such as aging populations, socio- economic development, and medical advances already is under way in developed countries and also in much of Asia and Latin America that is likely to produce a dramatic reduction in the infectious disease threat. The study projects that deaths caused primarily by infectious diseases will fall steadily from percent of the total disease burden in to percent in . Those from noninfectious diseases are likely to climb from percent of the total disease burden to percent, with the remainder of deaths due to accidents and other types of injuries. According to the study s rank- ing of major disease threats over this -year time frame, noninfectious diseases generally will rise in importance, led by heart disease and mental illness, as will accidental injuries. TB will remain in th place in , and HIV/ AIDS will move from th place to th, with the two combined accounting for more than percent of infectious disease-caused deaths among adults, almost all of them in developing countries. Lower respiratory infections will fall from the top spot to sixth place, however, while measles and malaria will drop precipitously from th and th place to th and th, respectively (see gures and ). Aging Populations. Demographic changes are one key to this scenario, which projects that declining fertility and infant mortality, along with increased life expectancy, will result in an aging global population more apt to be felled by noninfectious diseases and by accidental injury than by infectious diseases, which tend to occur among the very young. While these trends are generally evident on a global scale, there is considerable variance by region and level of development. Fertility has been cut by a half over the last years in most regions of the world, infant mortality worldwide dropped from to per , live births from to , and life expectancy worldwide increased from to years, according to the Toward a Global Surveillance and Response System Although a formal, fully integrated surveil- lance and response system does not yet exist at the global level, the WHO s Emerging and other Communicable Diseases Surveillance and Control (EMC) Division, working with UNAIDS and more than collaborating centers and laboratories, is making some progress. Independent networks of laboratories mon- itoring speci c diseases and the microbial resistance phenomenon are being expanded or established, while networks for reporting and exchanging information about infectious disease outbreaks are being enhanced. These networks include one on in uenza encompassing more than worldwide laboratories; a network for HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted diseases; several new or smaller networks focusing on hepatitis C and yellow fever; and one on microbial resistance in general. The EMC has taken the lead in revising international health reporting requirements to encompass a broader array of diseases. Member states capacities to monitor infectious diseases are being enhanced by increasing the number of developing coun- try health professionals capable of moni- toring and responding to disease outbreaks. Global infectious disease control efforts are being improved by better assisting countries to deal with disease outbreaks, such as ensuring that trained experts, vac- cines, and therapeutics are available to deal with such outbreaks. The global exchange of information among and within surveillance networks is being improved by expanding the availability of equipment for electronic communication through the Internet and World Wide Web sites, such as PROMED. UN Human Development Report. The overall population growth rate, meanwhile, will slow to . percent annually by , as com- pared to . percent between and . Socioeconomic Progress. Under this scenario, continued improved access to safe food and water in developing countries, better nutrition, and improved literacy will sharply reduce infant and adult mortality, already cut by more than half in developing countries since . The number of people with an average per cap- ita caloric intake of , per day is projected to increase from . billion in - to . billion by or roughly percent and adult literacy in the least developed countries is expected to grow from percent in to percent in . All of these factors would thus produce better health and health practices for young and old alike. Economic Gains. The optimistic scenario assumes that worldwide economic growth and rising incomes will further reduce poverty and provide funding for improvements in health care infrastructure, though it will be uneven in scope and by region. Real per capita income levels from to , for example, increased by percent in east Asia, per- cent in south Asia, and to percent in Latin America. Improved Health Care Capacity. Improve- ments in health care delivery in accordance with WHO s health for all goal are projected to continue in such areas as prenatal care for women, contraception, childhood and adult immunization, and availability of essential drugs. Already more than percent of women in developed and transitional countries and percent in the least developed countries receive some prenatal care. The number of women in developing countries using contraceptives increased from percent in to percent in . Immunization rates against six com- mon vaccine-preventable diseases have increased from percent to percent of the relevant population over the last two decades. aOf the six infectious diseases ranked in , only lower res- piratory infections, diarrheal diseases, and measles are trending downward as projected, while malaria is increasing and tuber- culosis and HIV are growing far faster than projected. Nonethe- less, more pessimistic experts have not developed an alternative model and generally adopt the projections of the Murray and Lopez model. Source: Adapted from World Bank, WHO, , edited by Christopher J. L. Murray and Alan D. Lopez. Table Projected Change in the Rank Order of Global Disease Burden for Leading Causes, Worldwide - , According to the Optimistic Scenarioa Rank Order Disease or Injury Rank Order Lower respiratory infections Diarrheal diseases Conditions arising during perinatal period Unipolar major depression Ischemic heart disease Cerebrovascular disease Tuberculosis Measles Road traf c deaths Congenital abnormalities Malaria Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease Falls Iron-de ciency anemia Protein-energy malnutrition War Self-in icted injuries Violence HIV Trachea, bronchus, and lung cancers And access to drugs continues to expand, except in the former communist states in East- ern Europe and in the former Soviet Union. All of these factors will combine to reduce child- hood diseases and mortality. Medical Advances. The optimistic scenario also notes that several diseases are on the verge of elimination or close to it, such as polio, neo- natal tetanus, and leprosy, while measles inci- dence also will be reduced dramatically as vaccination rates increase in the least devel- oped countries. Research efforts are projected to result in the development of more effective, safer, and in some cases, less expensive vac- cines. Disease agents against which vaccines have been developed recently include Lyme disease, while several others such as for malaria, dengue fever, and Ebola are in vari- ous stages of development. As the human genetic code is deciphered, additional genes that in uence infectious disease risk are likely to be discovered. Scenario Assessment. Our overall judgment is that the steady progress scenario is very unlikely to transpire over the time period of this Estimate. Although the scenario captures some real trends, it overstates the progress achiev- able, while underestimating the risks. The global life expectancy increases pro- jected by the optimists are likely to be sub- stantially offset by HIV/AIDS and related diseases, such as TB, which are already caus- ing a major reduction in life expectancy in the most heavily affected Sub-Saharan African countries and will be spreading extensively throughout heavily populated Asia during the time period of the Estimate. Optimists acknowledge that HIV/AIDS and TB will be the overarching infectious disease threats by , but they understate the magnitude of that threat, while their projections of a steep decline in malaria deaths is belied by the dis- ease s resurgence and growing death toll. The picture of steady socioeconomic progress is not consistent with the most recent surveys of conditions in developing countries under- taken by the United Nations, the World Bank, and other international agencies. These stud- ies point to a slowing of progress in basic social indicators in much of the developing world, even before the recent global nancial crisis. Although we judge that economic growth is likely to continue, we are less con dent that the dramatic reductions in poverty achieved in many countries in the last generation will be sustained. Growth is likely to be halting in many countries, owing to structural economic problems and the impact of recurring devel- oping world economic crises. The rapidly expanding costs of many drugs, especially those that attack critical infectious diseases, such as HIV/AIDS and multidrug resistant TB and malaria, threaten to limit the sustainability of improved health care. Fur- thermore, despite economic growth, pres- sures on government budgets, especially from rising pension and other costs, may limit the prospects for increased health nancing. The optimists may place too much emphasis on the steady progress of science, which is inconsistent with the demonstrated dif culty of developing new drugs and vaccines for complex pathogens such as HIV and malaria. The Pessimistic Scenario: Progress Stymied Surprisingly, even the most pessimistic epide- miologists have done little to project the long- term implications of their analysis and simply adopt the longer term projections of the World Bank/WHO model in the absence of a worst case model. We have developed a worst case scenario culled from a variety of epidemiologi- cal and broader health studies. This scenario highlights the dangers posed by microbial resistance among reemergent diseases such as TB and malaria. It takes a more concerned view of new diseases and of the HIV/AIDS pan- demic, in particular, and is skeptical about the adequacy of world health care capacity to con- front these challenges. It emphasizes continu- ing and dif cult-to-address poverty challenges in developing countries and projects an incom- plete health transition that prolongs the heavy infectious disease burden in the least developed countries and sustains their role as reservoirs of infection for the rest of the world. A Not-So-Benign Demographic Picture. Although the global population growth rate is slowing, world population still will expand by million annually through , mostly in developing countries, where especially the youngest population cohorts will remain highly susceptible to infectious diseases. Infant mor- tality in the least developed countries is running at nearly double the global average and is eight times that of developed countries, while life expectancy is years below that of developed countries and years below the global aver- age. These trends will be especially evident in urban areas where poverty, overcrowding, poor sanitation, and polluted drinking water create conditions in which infectious diseases and relevant vectors, such as mosquitoes and rodents, thrive. The problem will only worsen when the number of people living in cities exceeding million more than doubles to million by , with almost all of the increase occurring in developing world cities. Disparate Socioeconomic Development. Although the broad long-term trend in global economic growth is likely to be upward, this scenario posits a growing prosperity gap between the developed and developing coun- tries and within developing countries, particu- larly the poorest cohort. Despite the near doubling of real per capita income from to globally, for example, it declined in Sub-Saharan Africa, and income gaps within these countries are widening substantially, as well. One- fth of developing country popula- tions remain malnourished the biggest risk factor for infectious diseases billion lack adequate sanitation, and billion still have no access to safe drinking water. Recurring eco- nomic crises in developing countries, more- over, are likely to have a negative impact on foreign and domestic investor willingness to invest in them, slowing their economic growth rates further and widening the gap with devel- oped countries. Inadequate Health Care Delivery and Disease Surveillance. Tightening of health care eligi- bility requirements, privatization, and the grow- ing costs of health care, particularly for HIV/ AIDS patients, are likely to continue to squeeze health care delivery worldwide, but the impact will be greatest in Sub-Saharan Africa as well as in China where percent of the rural pop- ulation no longer has subsidized health care and in the former communist states. Under this scenario access to essential drugs and basic medical care in these regions will remain poor or deteriorate, and many Sub-Saharan African countries, in particular, will continue to rely on international and NGO assistance for a modicum of health care and surveillance capa- bility. Although current global surveillance and response capabilities are likely to improve, the emergence of an integrated global network is at least a decade or more away, owing to inade- quate capacity and cooperation and resource constraints. Toward a Postantibiotic Era? The growth and intensity of antimicrobial resistance among infectious pathogens increases, due both to pathogen mutation and to inappropriate and indiscriminate use of therapeutic drugs in both developed and developing countries. Two- thirds of all oral antibiotics worldwide are obtained without a prescription and are inap- propriately used against diseases such as TB, malaria, pneumonia, and more routine child- hood infections. These practices contribute to antimicrobial resistance and the severe, nearly impossible to treat hospital-acquired infections. Even vancomycin, the last defense against a number of such infections, is losing effective- ness. According to WHO, In the struggle for supremacy, the microbes are sprinting ahead and the gap between their ability to mutate into resistant strains and man s ability to counter them is widening fast. Some epidemiologists and health experts have even suggested that we may be entering a postantibiotic era in which existing antimicrobials, in general, will lose their effectiveness against the most common infectious diseases. Inadequate Drug and Vaccine Development. The development of new antimicrobial drugs and vaccines does not keep pace with new and resistant pathogens owing to the complexity of pathogens such as HIV and malaria, the slow pace of new antimicrobial development and approval, and in many cases a lack of commer- cial incentives for drug companies to develop new antibiotics for diseases prevalent in devel- oping countries. Most recent efforts to develop new or more effective drugs and vaccines against dengue, malaria, E. coli, TB, and sev- eral other infectious diseases are likely to be prolonged. WHO estimates that development of an effective vaccine against malaria, for exam- ple, is at least seven to years away, while a cure for HIV/AIDS is likely to be even more distant. The majority of new drugs and vac- cines, moreover, are likely to be beyond the reach of most developing country populations because of their cost. Continued Threat From HIV/AIDS. The threat from HIV/AIDS and related diseases over the next two decades continues to surge. Although behavioral changes and multidrug treatments will slow infection and death rates in developed countries, these advances are likely to be more than offset by the rapid spread of the disease among the vast populations of India, Russia, China, and Latin America. HIV/AIDS burden projections since the start of the pan- demic have consistently been surpassed, while the slow pace of behavioral changes in the developing world, high costs of available treat- ment, and the obstacles to developing a cure portend more increases in the future. The joint World Bank/WHO model s projections that HIV/AIDS deaths would peak in with . million deaths, for example, were already exceeded by the . million deaths in . Two other models likewise have underestimated the HIV/AIDS threat, albeit less so. Similarly, the World Bank/WHO model s baseline projection of roughly . million TB deaths in is likely to be exceeded in the next decade, as may its worst case scenario of . million deaths if HIV co-infection surges. According to UNAIDS epidemiologists, Asia alone is likely to outstrip Sub-Saharan Africa in the absolute number of HIV carriers by . When cou- pled with the poor prospects for developing a cure and likely growing resistance to the multidrug therapies now in use, the HIV/AIDS burden could reach catastrophic proportions over the next years (see gure ). The Infectiousness of Noninfectious Dis- eases. Prospects that the infectious disease threat may not diminish, as compared to non- communicable diseases, are further butressed by the growing body of evidence that infectious pathogens cause or contribute to many dis- eases such as diabetes, cancer, heart disease, and ulcers previously thought to be caused by environmental or lifestyle factors. WHO and other institutions estimate that up to percent of cancers, for example, could be avoided by preventing the infectious diseases associated with them, including more than percent of stomach and cervical cancers and percent of liver cancers. Scenario Assessment. Our overall judgment is that the progress stymied scenario, while more plausible than the optimistic scenario, is also unlikely to develop over the period of this Estimate. Although the pessimistic scenario provides an important counterpoint to the assumptions in the steady progress scenario, it understates the likely longer term impact of economic development, scienti c progress, and political pressures in responding to the infec- tious disease threat. The demographic projections understate the likely impact of continued progress in reduc- ing infant mortality. Improvements in the economic conditions of poor countries and the poorest within coun- tries are probably more important for the infectious disease outlook than the widening prosperity gap both between countries and within countries. Although the outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa remains bleak, for the rest of the world progress against infectious diseases would stall only under the most dire global economic scenario. The negative impact on health care delivery of privatization and the transitions in former communist states is likely to be most heavily felt in the immediate future. Free market reforms eventually will improve health care delivery. The current success of the mutating microbes in the race against scienti c inno- vation will, in and of itself, call forth a greater research effort that will, over time, increase the likelihood of a reversal of this trend. The rapid spread of HIV/AIDS in developing and former communist countries is likely to reinvigorate international efforts to address the virus through both medical and behav- ioral approaches. It will especially give impe- tus to the search for a more cost-effective approach than at present. While growth in surveillance and response capabilities are slow, they are real and are unlikely to be reversed. The Most Likely Scenario: Deterioration, Then Limited Improvement According to this scenario, continued deteriora- tion during the rst half of our time frame led by hard core killers such as HIV/AIDS, TB, and malaria is followed by limited improve- ment in the second half, owing primarily to gains against childhood and vaccine-prevent- able diseases such as diarrheal diseases, neona- tal tetanus, and measles. The scale and scope of the overall infectious disease threat diminishes, but the remaining threat consists of especially deadly or incurable diseases such as HIV/ AIDS, TB, hepatitis C and possibly, heretofore, unknown diseases, with HIV/AIDS and TB likely comprising the overwhelming majority of infectious disease deaths in developing countries alone by . Scenario Assessment Because some elements of both the optimistic and pessimistic scenarios cited above are likely to appear during the -year time frame of this Estimate, we are likely to witness neither steady progress against the infectious disease threat nor its unabated intensi cation. Instead, progress is likely to be slow and uneven, with advances, such as the recent development of a new type of antibiotic drug against certain hos- pital-acquired infections, frequently offset by renewed setbacks, such as new signs of grow- ing microbial resistance among available HIV/ AIDS drugs and withdrawal of a promising new vaccine against rotavirus because of adverse side effects. On balance, negative driv- ers, such as microbial resistance, are likely to prevail over the next decade, but given time, positive ones, such as gradual socioeconomic development and improved health care capac- ity, will likely come to the fore in the second decade. The negative trends cited in the pessimistic scenario above, such as persistent poverty in much of the developing world, growing microbial resistance and a dearth of new replacement drugs, inadequate disease sur- veillance and control capacity, and the high prevalence and continued spread of major killers such as HIV/AIDS, TB, and malaria, are likely to remain ascendant and worsen the overall problem during the rst half of our time frame. Sub-Saharan Africa, India, and Southeast Asia will remain the hardest hit by these dis- eases. The European FSU states and China are likely to experience a surge in HIV/AIDS and related diseases such as TB. The devel- oped countries will be threatened principally by the real possibility of a resurgence of the HIV/AIDS threat owing to growing microbial resistance to the current spectrum of multi- drug therapies and to a wide array of other drugs used to combat infectious diseases. The broadly positive trends cited in the more optimistic scenario, such as aging populations, global socioeconomic development, improved health care capacity, and medical advances, are likely to come to the fore during the second half of our time frame in all but the least devel- oped countries, and even the least developed will experience a measure of improvement. Aging populations and expected continued declines in fertility throughout Asia, Latin America, the former FSU states, and Sub- Saharan Africa will sharply reduce the size of age cohorts that are particularly susceptible to infectious diseases owing to environmental or behavioral factors. Socioeconomic development, however tful, and resulting improvements in water quality, sanitation, nutrition, and education in most developing countries will enable the most susceptible population cohorts to better with- stand infectious diseases both physically and behaviorally. The worsening infectious disease threat we posit for the rst decade of our time frame is likely to further energize the international community and most countries to devote more attention and resources to improved infectious disease surveillance, response, and control capacity. The WHO s new campaign against malaria, recent developed country consideration of tying debt forgiveness for the poorest countries in part to their undertak- ing stronger commitments to combat disease, self-initiated efforts by Sub-Saharan African governments to confront HIV/AIDS, and greater pharmaceutical industry willingness to provide more drugs to poor countries at affordable prices are likely to be harbingers of more such efforts as the infectious disease threat becomes more acute. The likely eventual approval of new drugs and vaccines now in the developmental stage for major killers such as dengue, diar- rheal diseases, and possibly even malaria will further ease the infectious disease burden and help counter the microbial resistance phe- nomenon. Together, these developments are likely to set the stage for at least a limited improvement in infectious disease control, particularly against childhood and vaccine-preventable diseases, such as respiratory infections, diarrheal dis- eases, neonatal tetanus, and measles in most developing and former communist countries. Given time and barring the appearance of a deadly and highly infectious new disease, a cat- astrophic expansion of the HIV/AIDS pan- demic, or the release of a highly contagious biological agent capable of rapid and widescale secondary spread such medical advances, behavioral changes, and improving national and international surveillance and response capacities will eventually produce substantial gains against the overall infectious disease threat. In the event that HIV/AIDS takes a cata- strophic turn for the worse in both developed and developing countries, even the authors of the optimistic World Bank/WHO model concur that all bets are off. Economic, Social, and Political Impacts The persistent infectious disease burden is likely to aggravate and, in extreme cases, may even provoke social fragmentation, economic decay, and political polarization in the hardest hit countries in the developing and former com- munist worlds in particular, especially in the worst case scenario outlined above. This, in turn, will hamper progress against infectious diseases. Even under the most likely scenario that posits some attenuation of the infectious disease threat in the second half of our time frame, new and reemergent infectious diseases are likely to have a disruptive impact on global economic, social, and political dynamics. Economic Impact Likely To Grow Macroeconomic Impact The macroeconomic costs of the infectious dis- ease burden are increasingly signi cant for the most seriously affected countries despite the partially offsetting impact of declines in popu- lation growth, and they will take an even greater toll on productivity, pro tability, and foreign investment in the future. A senior World Bank of cial considers AIDS to be the single biggest threat to economic development in Sub-Saharan Africa. A growing number of studies suggest that AIDS and malaria alone will reduce GDP in several Sub-Saharan Afri- can countries by percent or more by . The impact of infectious diseases on annual GDP growth in heavily affected countries already amounts to as much as a -percentage point reduction in the case of HIV/AIDS on average and to percentage points for malaria, according to World Bank studies. A recent Namibian study concluded that AIDS cost the country nearly percent of GDP in , while a study of Kenya projected that GDP will be . percent smaller in than it otherwise would have been without the cumulative impact of AIDS. The annual cost of malaria to Kenya s GDP was estimated at to percent and at to percent for Nigeria. Microeconomic Impact The impact of infectious diseases especially HIV/AIDS at the sector and rm level already appears to be substantial and growing and will be re ected eventually in higher GDP losses (see gure ), especially in the more advanced developing countries with specialized work force needs. A recent study by the Zimbabwe Commercial Farmers Union estimated that production losses due to HIV/AIDS in the communal and resettlement areas the African farm-holder sector is close to percent. WHO estimates that small farmers in Nigeria and Kenya spend and percent, respec- tively, of total household income on malaria treatment that would otherwise go to other forms of consumption of more bene t to the economy. Although a World Bank sponsored study of nearly , firms in four African countries focusing solely on the impact of AIDS-related employee turnover concluded that it was not likely to substantially affect firm profits, sev- eral individual firms and their AIDS consult- ants paint a much bleaker picture by . Using broader measures of AIDS-related costs, such as absenteeism, productivity declines, health and insurance payments, and recruit- ment and training, they projected profits to drop by to percent or more and productiv- ity to decline by percent. They are especially troubled by the high rate of loss of middle- and upper-level managers to AIDS and the dearth of replacements, as well as the loss of large numbers of skilled workers to AIDS in the mining and other key sectors. According to one expert, South African companies will begin to feel the full impact of the AIDS epi- demic by . One study of the projected impact of AIDS on employee benefit costs in South Africa concludes that benefit costs would nearly triple to percent of salaries from to , substantially eroding cor- porate profits. Fiscal Impact. Infectious diseases will increase pressure on national health bills that already consume some to percent of GDP in devel- oped countries, up to percent in the better off developing countries, but currently less than percent in least developed states. By , the cumulative direct and indirect costs of AIDS alone are likely to have topped $ billion, according to estimates by the Global AIDS Policy Coalition at Harvard University. In Latin America, the Pan-Ameri- can Health Organization in estimated it would take a decade and $ billion to bring the cholera pandemic in the region under con- trol through a massive water cleanup effort, or nearly percent of total developing country health spending for that year. The direct costs of ghting malaria in Sub- Saharan Africa increased from $ million in to $ . billion in , largely owing to the far higher cost of treating the growing number of drug-resistant cases, and the trend toward higher costs is likely to continue. Infectious Disease-Related Trade Disruptions Infectious diseases will continue to cause costly periodic disruptions in trade and com- merce in every region of the world. Avian u in Hong Kong. The avian in u- enza outbreak in cost the former col- ony hundreds of millions of dollars in lost poultry production, commerce, and tour- ism, with airport arrivals in November of that year alone down by percent from the preceding year. BSE and nvCJD in Britain. The outbreak of BSE and new variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in the United Kingdom in prompted a mass slaughter of cattle, drasti- cally cut beef consumption, and led to the imposition of a three-year EU embargo against British beef. The losses to the Brit- ish economy were estimated by the WHO at $ . billion, including $ billion in lost beef exports. Cyclospora in Guatemalan raspberries. The outbreak of cyclospora-related illness in the United States and Canada associ- ated with raspberries from Guatemala led to curbs in imports that cost Guatemala several million dollars in lost revenue. Cholera in Peru. The outbreak of cholera in cost the Peruvian shing industry an estimated $ million in lost tourism and trade because of a temporary ban on seafood exports. Foot and mouth disease in Taiwan. In an outbreak of foot and mouth dis- ease (FMD) devastated Taiwan s pork industry one of the largest in the world shutting down exports for a full year. Nipah in Malaysia. In , the Nipah virus caused the shutdown of over half of the country s pig farms and an embargo against pork exports. Plague in India. The plague outbreak in Surat, India, in and ensuing panic sparked a sudden exodus of . million people from the region and led to abrupt shutdowns of entire industries, including aviation, and tourism, as several countries froze trade, banned travel from India, and sent some Indian migrants home. The WHO estimated the outbreak cost India some $ billion. AIDS, along with TB and malaria particu- larly the drug-resistant varieties makes large budgetary claims on national health systems resources (see gure ). Policy choices will continue to be required along at least three dimensions: spending for health versus spend- ing for other objectives; spending more on pre- vention in order to spend less on treatment; and treating burgeoning AIDS-infected popula- tions versus treating other illnesses. Although prevention is cost-ef cient the eradication of smallpox has shaved $ bil- lion off the global health bill, and polio eradi- cation would save as much as $ billion annually by most countries will not be able to afford even basic care for those infected with diseases such as TB and HIV/ AIDS. In Zimbabwe, for example, more than half the meager health budget is spent on treating AIDS. Yet, treating one AIDS patient for a year in Sub-Saharan Africa costs as much as educating primary school stu- dents for one year. Public health spending on AIDS and related diseases threatens to crowd out other types of health care and social spending. In India, for example, simulated annual government health expenditures in the context of a severe AIDS epidemic in which total expenditures, including AIDS costs, are subsidized at percent would add $ billion annually to the government s health bill through and $ billion with a government subsidy of percent. In Kenya, HIV/AIDS treatment costs are projected to account for percent of health spending by . In South Africa, such costs could account for to percent of public health expenditures by , according to one projection. Even given the budgetary dominance of AIDS, care is likely to be limited to the most basic of therapies. Few countries will be able to afford the high cost of multidrug treatment for HIV/AIDS or for drug-resistant TB and malaria ensuring that such diseases will continue to be highly prevalent. Only about percent of HIV/AIDS patients even in rela- tively well off South Africa currently undergo multidrug treatment, for example, while it would cost Russia several billion dollars annually to provide such treatment for its surging HIV/AIDS case load which is unlikely given its scal dif culties. In addi- tion to the cost of the drugs, few countries can afford to build and maintain the health care infrastructure that makes effective treatment possible. Disruptive Social Impact At least some of the hardest-hit countries, ini- tially in Sub-Saharan Africa and later in other regions, will face a demographic catastrophe as HIV/AIDS and associated diseases reduce human life expectancy dramatically and kill up to a quarter of their populations over the period of this Estimate (see table ). This will further impoverish the poor and often the middle class and produce a huge and impoverished orphan cohort unable to cope and vulnerable to exploi- tation and radicalization. Life Expectancy and Population Growth. Until the early s, economic development and improved health care had raised the life expectancy in developing countries to years, with prospects that it would go higher still. The growing number of deaths from new and reemergent diseases such as AIDS, however, will slow or reverse this trend toward longer life spans in heavily affected countries by as much as years or more by , according to the US Census Bureau. For example, life expectancy will be reduced by years in Botswana and Zimbabwe, by years in Nige- ria and South Africa, by years in Honduras, by eight years in Brazil, by four years in Haiti, and by three years in Thailand. Family Structure. The degradation of nuclear and extended families across all classes will produce severe social and economic disloca- tions with political consequences, as well. Nearly million children in countries will have lost one or both parents to AIDS by ; by , this number will increase to . mil- lion. Nineteen of the hardest hit countries are in Sub-Saharan Africa, where HIV/AIDS has been prevalent across all social sectors. Chil- dren are increasingly acquiring HIV from their mothers during pregnancy or through breast- feeding, ensuring prolongation and intensi ca- tion of the epidemic and its economic reverber- ations. With as much as a third of the children under in hardest-hit countries expected to comprise a lost orphaned generation by with little hope of educational or employment opportunities, these countries will be at risk of further economic decay, increased crime, and political instability as such young people become radicalized or are exploited by various political groups for their own ends; the perva- sive child soldier phenomenon may be one example. Destabilizing Political and Security Impact In our view, the infectious disease burden will add to political instability and slow democratic development in Sub-Saharan Africa, parts of Asia, and the former Soviet Union, while also increasing political tensions in and among some developed countries. The severe social and economic impact of infectious diseases, particularly HIV/AIDS, and the in ltration of these diseases into the ruling political and military elites and middle classes of developing countries are likely to intensify the struggle for political power to control scarce state resources. This will ham- per the development of a civil society and other underpinnings of democracy and will increase pressure on democratic transitions in regions such as the FSU and Sub-Saharan Africa where the infectious disease burden will add to economic misery and political polarization. A study by Ted Robert Gurr, et al., on the causes of state instability in cases over a -year period ending in suggests that infant mortality is a good indicator of the overall quality of life, which correlates strongly with political instability. According to the research, three variables out of high infant mortality which in developing countries owes substantially to infectious dis- eases; low openness to trade; and incomplete Source: Adapted from United States Bureau of the Census, . Table Projected Demographic Indicators for in Selected Countries With and Without AIDS Country Projected Child Mortalitya Per , Live Births, a. Probable deaths before age . Projected Life Expectancy, With AIDS Without With AIDS Without Sub-Saharan Africa Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cote d Ivoire Dem. Rep. of Congo Ethiopia Kenya Lesotho Malawi Namibia Nigeria Rwanda South Africa Swaziland Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Latin America Brazil Haiti Honduras Southeast Asia Burma Cambodia Thailand democratization accounted for two-thirds of demonstrated instability. The study de ned instability as revolutionary wars, ethnic wars, genocides, and disruptive regime transi- tions. High infant mortality has a particularly strong correlation with the likelihood of state failure in partial democracies. Infectious diseases also will affect national security and international peacekeeping efforts as militaries and military recruitment pools experience increased deaths and disabilities from infectious diseases. The greatest impact will be among hard-to-replace of cers, non- commissioned of cers, and enlisted soldiers with specialized skills and among militaries with advanced weapons and weapons platforms of all kinds. HIV/AIDS prevalence in selected militaries, mostly in Sub-Saharan Africa, generally ranges from to percent (see table ). This is considerably higher than their civilian populations and owes to risky lifestyles and deployment away from home. Commence- ment of testing and exclusion of HIV-positive recruits in the militaries of a few countries, is reducing HIV prevalence but it continues to grow in most militaries. Militaries in key FSU states are increasingly experiencing the impact of negative health developments within their countries, such as deteriorating health infrastructure and reduced funding. One in three Russian draft- ees currently is rejected for various health reasons, as compared to one in in , according to one Russian newspaper report. Mounting infectious disease-caused deaths among the military of cer corps in military- dominated and democratizing polities also may contribute to the deprivation, insecurity, and political machinations that incline some to launch coups and counter-coups aimed, more often than not, at plundering state coffers. It is dif cult to make a direct connection between high HIV/AIDS and other infectious disease prevalence in military forces and per- formance in battle. But, given that a large num- ber of of cers and other key personnel are dying or becoming disabled, combat readiness and capability of such military forces is bound to deteriorate. Infectious disease-related deaths and disabili- ties are likely to have the greatest impact on the capabilities of Sub-Saharan militaries, particularly those that have achieved at least a modest level of modernization in weapons systems and platforms. Over the longer term, the consequences of the continuing spread of deadly diseases such as HIV/AIDS on the capabilities of the more modernized militar- ies in FSU states and possibly China and cer- tain rogue states with large armies and modern weapons arsenals may be severe as well. The negative impact of high infectious disease prevalence on national militaries also is likely to be felt in international and regional peace- keeping operations, limiting their effectiveness and also making them vectors for the further spread of diseases among coalition peacekeep- ers and local populations. Although the United Nations of cially requires that prospective peacekeeping troops be disease free, it is dif cult to enforce this rule with such methods as HIV testing, given the paucity of available troops and the poten- tial noncompliance of many contributing states. Healthy peacekeeping forces will remain at risk of being infected by disease-carrying forces and local populations, as well as by high-risk behavior and inadequate medical care. In developed countries, the political debate over AIDS and other infectious diseases is likely to focus on budgetary issues and negligence in the handling of blood and food- stuffs, as well as on treatment of infectious dis- eases. HIV blood and other controversies in several European countries have sparked political uproars and led to the dismissal or prosecu- tion of government of cials, and have even contributed to the fall of some governments. Infectious diseases also will loom larger in glo- bal interstate relations as related embargoes and boycotts to prevent their spread create trade frictions and controversy over culpability, such as in the recently ended three-year EU embargo of British beef, which was imposed to stop the spread of mad cow disease. Developed coun- tries, moreover, will come under pressure from international and nongovernmental organiza- tions, as well as from developing countries, to deal with infectious disease-related instability and economic and medical needs in the hard- est-hit countries. A growing controversy, in this regard, will be over drug-related intellectual property rights, in which developing countries will press for more and cheaper drugs from developed country pharmaceutical rms and resort to producing their own generic brands if they are rebuffed. States will remain concerned, as well, about the growing biological warfare threat from rogue states and terrorist groups. Infectious Diseases and US National Security As a major hub of global travel, immigration, and commerce, along with having a large civil- ian and military presence and wide-ranging interests overseas, the United States will remain at risk from global infectious disease outbreaks, or even a bioterrorist incident using infectious disease microbes. Infectious diseases will continue to kill nearly , Americans annually and many more in the event of an epi- demic of in uenza or yet-unknown disease or a Source: DIA/AFMIC, . Table HIV Prevalence in Selected Militaries in Sub-Saharan Africa Country Estimated HIV Prevalence (percent) Angola to Congo (Brazzaville) to Cote d Ivoire to Democratic Republic of the Congo to Eritrea Nigeria to Tanzania to steep decline in the effectiveness of available HIV/AIDS drugs. Although several emerging infectious diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, were rst identi ed in the United States, most, including HIV/AIDS, originate outside US bor- ders, with the entry of the West Nile virus in a case in point (see inset). Threats to the US Civilian Population The US civilian population will remain directly vulnerable to a wide variety of infectious diseases, from resurgent ones such as multidrug resistant TB to deadly newer ones such as HIV/ AIDS and hepatitis C. Infectious disease- related deaths in the United States have increased by about . percent per year since to deaths per , people by , or roughly , deaths annually, as com- pared to an annual decrease of . percent in the preceding years and an alltime low of deaths per , in (see gure ). The USCDC estimates that the total direct and indi- rect medical costs from infectious diseases comprise some percent of all US health care expenditures or $ billion in dollars. In the opinion of the US Institute of Medicine, the next major infectious disease threat to the United States may be, like HIV, a previously unrecognized pathogen. Barring that, the most likely known infectious diseases to directly and signi cantly impact the United States over the next decade will be HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C, and multidrug resistant TB, or a new, more lethal variant of in uenza. Foodborne illnesses and hospital-acquired infections also pose a threat: HIV/AIDS was rst identi ed in the United States in but originated in Sub-Saharan Africa. In the United States, HIV/AIDS deaths surged from , in to , in before dropping dramatically to , in as a result of behavioral and therapeutic changes among the most at risk populations. The total number of those infected reached , for all of North America in , including , new infections, most of them in the United States. Although HIV/AIDS-related death rates have declined sharply, the poor prospects that a vaccine will be available over the next decade or more, along with the likelihood that the virus will develop growing resistance to the protease-inhibitor drugs now in use, portend a continued rise in the infection rate and a renewed rise in the death rate. Hepatitis C. Some million Americans are chronic carriers of hepatitis C, which was rst identi ed in the United States in . The hepatitis C burden will continue to grow for at least another decade due to the dis- ease s long incubation period, with the num- ber of deaths possibly surpassing HIV/AIDS deaths by even though the rate of new infections is dropping, owing to improved blood supply testing. About percent of those infected will develop life-threatening cirrhosis of the liver, and many more will experience a more slowly developing chronic liver disease, including cancer. The disease also will remain the leading cause of liver transplantation. Foodborne illnesses. According to the USCDC, tens of millions of foodborne illness cases, including , deaths, occur each year in the United States. The threat from foodborne illnesses will persist given chang- ing consumption patterns and further global- ization of the food supply. The threat from highly virulent, antimicro- bial-resistant pathogens such as Staphylo- coccus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, and enterrococci which kill some , hospital patients annually is likely to grow, particularly if the remaining small arsenal of effective drugs, such as vancomycin, becomes ineffective. TB. After declining dramatically for several decades, TB in the rst half of the s made a comeback in urban areas and in some states with large refugee and immigrant populations, where some , to , cases were reported annually, up from a low of , in . More alarming was the rise of multidrug resistant TB from per- cent of total cases before to percent of cases resistant to at least one drug and percent resistant to two or more of the ve frontline anti-TB drugs a decade later. Some high-risk populations in prisons and those with HIV/AIDS have experienced death rates from TB as high as to percent. Although a massive and costly intervention by state and local authorities reversed the overall infection rate to , by , the multidrug resistant TB threat persists, and TB incidence continues to grow among immi- grant populations. About percent of all active TB cases in the United States up from percent in currently occur among immigrants, particularly illegal ones from countries where TB is highly endemic. In uenza. Although the deadly in u- enza pandemic that caused more than . mil- lion US deaths appears to have started in the United States, almost all others have origi- nated in China and Southeast Asia. Epidemi- ologists generally agree that the threat of another killer in uenza pandemic is high and that it is not a question of whether, but when, it will occur. Even in the absence of a widespread killer pandemic, in uenza has caused , US deaths annually in recent years nearly double the annual average in the - period, owing in part to the high vulnerability to the disease of the growing cohort of older Americans and HIV-infected persons. In uenza will remain essentially an uncontrolled disease because the viruses are highly ef cient in their ability to survive and change into more virulent strains. USCDC researchers predict that, in an in uenza epi- demic infecting percent of the US popula- tion, the mean number of expected deaths would be approximately , in one year, regardless of immunization status. The num- ber of hospitalizations would total , , and the number of outpatient cases would reach million. If the attack rate were percent, the number of expected deaths would be , in one year and all other illness rates would be correspondingly higher. Other Infectious Disease Threats Other diseases that are periodically imported and are more likely to be costly in economic terms rather than in lives lost include malaria, cholera, and various animal diseases: Malaria. Malaria was domestically elimi- nated in the s but has reemerged over the last two decades due to the increase in immi- gration and international travel. Currently, some , cases of malaria are reported to the USCDC annually, with about half occur- ring among US travelers to highly endemic countries in the tropics and the other half among foreign nationals entering the United States, primarily agricultural workers and illegal migrants. Although malaria outbreaks have been relatively isolated and have been brought under control quickly, the disease has the potential to become reestablished in the United States because of the abundance of mosquito vectors, especially in southern states. Mechanisms of Disease Entry Into the United States The following are a few prominent methods of pathogen entry into the United States: International travel. More than million Americans traveled outside the United States for recreational and business pur- poses in often to high risk coun- tries more than double the number just a decade before. In addition, tens of millions of foreign-born travelers enter the United States every year. Travelers on commercial ights can reach most US cities from any part of the world within hours which is shorter than the incubation periods of many infectious diseases. Immigration. Approximately million immigrants and refugees enter the United States legally each year, often from coun- tries with high infectious disease preva- lence, while several hundred thousand enter illegally. The USCDC has the author- ity to detain, isolate, or provisionally release persons at US ports of entry show- ing symptoms of any one of seven diseases (yellow fever, cholera, diphtheria, infec- tious TB, plague, suspected smallpox, and viral hemorrhagic fevers). Although each individual must undergo a medical exami- nation before entering the country, poten- tially excludable conditions may be in the incubating and therefore less detectable stages. Moreover, US law prohibits the Immigra- tion and Naturalization Service from returning refugees who have credible rea- sons to fear political persecution, including those refugees af icted with infectious diseases. Returning US military forces. Although US military populations are immunized against many infectious diseases and are especially sensitized to detecting any symp- toms before or after their return to the United States, not all cases are likely to be detected, especially among National Guardsmen and Reservists, who are far more likely to enter the civilian health care system and may not associate a later-devel- oping illness with their overseas travel. The globalization of food supplies. Food- borne illnesses have become more common as the number of food imports has doubled over the past ve years, owing to changing consumer preferences and increased trade. At certain times of the year, more than percent of the fruits and vegetables avail- able in grocery stores and restaurants are imported and, therefore, potentially more likely to be infected with pathogenic micro- organisms, according to a foodborne dis- ease expert. Fears that cholera, which has become endemic in Latin America over the past decade, would nd its way into the United States have not been realized, but isolated cases have been occurring at a more frequent rate than at any time since when cholera surveillance commenced. Thus, the disease looms as a potential threat. Dengue. Dengue, along with the far more serious dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome, was reintroduced into the United States in the mid- s by foreign travelers; the mosquito vector is now wide- spread throughout the southeast. There were cases in , all of which were acquired overseas. Foreign animal diseases. In addition to the more obvious human impacts, imported ani- mal diseases present considerable potential risks to the domestic economy, trade, and commerce. Those potentially capable of sig- ni cantly harming US agriculture include foot and mouth disease (FMD), avian in u- enza, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, and African swine fever. An outbreak of foot and mouth disease in the US livestock indus- try could cost as much as $ billion over years in increased consumer costs, reduced livestock productivity, and restricted trade, according to USDA estimates. Another USDA study revealed that, if African swine fever were to become reestablished in the US swine population, the cost over a -year period would be $ . billion. Threats to Deployed Military Forces Deployed US military forces have historically experienced higher rates of hospital admission from infectious diseases than from battle eld combat and noncombat injuries (see gure and table ). In addition to disease transmission between deployed troops and indigenous populations, warfare-related social disruption often creates refugees and internally displaced persons that can pass infections along to US military forces. Allied coalition forces may themselves bring infectious diseases into an area for the rst time and transmit them to US forces and the indigenous population. Threats to deployed US forces will vary by country, region, and the nature of the deploy- ment and its mission: Least threatened will be US forces deployed in longstanding US, NATO, and other allied bases in Europe, especially northern Europe, and in Japan, where base medical facilities, food sources and handling, as well as local health care infrastructures are on a par with US standards. At highest risk will be those forces deployed to less developed regions for contingency operations such as humanitarian, peacekeep- ing, and peace enforcement missions. Local medical care in such regions often is poor, and infectious disease prevalence is high, both among the local population and some- times among coalition peacekeeping forces. Speci c examples of diseases that have and may continue to appear in association with military and peacekeeping operations include respiratory diseases such as TB and in u- enza, diarrheal diseases, malaria, hepatitis A and E, sexually transmitted diseases, dengue and dengue hemorrhagic fever, and leishmaniasis. Impact on US Interests Abroad In addition to their impact on the US popula- tion, infectious diseases will add to the social, economic, and political strains in key regions and countries in which the United States has signi cant interests or may be called upon to provide assistance: Infectious diseases are likely to slow socio- economic development in developing and former communist countries and regions of interest to the United States. This will chal- lenge democratic development and transitions and possibly contribute to humanitarian emergencies and military con icts to which the United States may need to respond. Infectious disease-related trade embargoes and restrictions on travel and immigration also will cause frictions among and with key trading partners and other selected states. The Biological Warfare Threat The biological warfare and terrorism threat to US national security is on the rise as rogue states and terrorist groups also exploit the ease of global travel and communication in pursuit of their goals: The ability of such foreign-based groups and individuals to enter and operate within the United States has already been demonstrated and could recur. The West Nile virus scare, and several earlier instances of suspected bio- terrorism, showed, as well, the confusion and fear they can sow regardless of whether or not they are validated. The threat to US forces and interests overseas also will continue to increase as more nations develop a capability to field at least limited numbers of biological weapons, and nihilistic and religiously motivated groups contemplate opting for them to cause maximum casualties. a Usual level of disease occurrence in an area. Source: DIA/AFMIC, . Table Disease Threats to US Forces in the Gulf Disease Category Examples Endemic Levelsa Diarrheal Bacterial, protozoal, viral Moderately-to-highly endemic Other foodborne or waterborne Hepatitis A and E, typhoid/paratyphoid fevers Moderately-to-highly endemic Vectorborne Malaria Sand y fever, Leishmaniasis, other arbovi- ral (including dengue, West Nile, Sindbis, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fevers) Focally endemic in Oman, Saudi Arabia, UAE Endemic Person-to-person/close contact Tuberculosis, meningococcal meningitis Low-to-moderately endemic Sexually transmitted and/or bloodborne contact Hepatitis B/D and C, Gonorrhea Moderately-to-highly endemic Other endemic Brucellosis, Q fever, leptospirosis, tra- choma, intestinal parasites, anthrax Endemic, especially in lower socioeco- nomic groups