Growing Global Migration and Its Implications for the United States NIE - D March Growing Global Migration and Its Implications for the United States This Estimate was approved for publication by the National Foreign Intelligence Board under the authority of the Director of Central Intelligence. NIE - D March Preface NIE - D March Growing Global Migration and Its Implications for the United States I am pleased to share with you this unclassi ed version of a new National Intelligence Estimate on the growing global movement of people and its implications for the United States. It is a follow-on study to our special publication, Global Trends : A Dialogue About the Future With Non- government Experts, published in December . Global Trends examined the broad features of the changing security environment and identi ed key global drivers and their likely impact over the next years including demography and natural resources, technology, global- ization and governance, likely con icts and prospects for cooperation, and the role of the United States. It is intended to help senior US leaders rec- ognize and deal with longer term problems and uncertainties and to inform the broader debate on these important issues. Migration will move higher on the policy agendas of many countries including the United States as new waves of legal and illegal migrants, asylum-seekers, and refugees ee poverty, con ict, and persecution in their native lands. The latest US census underscored this trend in the United States, and it is undoubtedly taking place elsewhere, as well. Rising migration will provide challenges and opportunities to both sending and receiving countries. Sending countries will bene t from emigrant remit- tances, for example, but they will lose some of their more industrious peo- ple, while returning immigrants can play both constructive and disruptive political roles. In the richer receiving countries, migration will alleviate demographic and labor force shortfalls, but it also will add to social and cultural tensions. This National Intelligence Estimate focuses on: The causes and likely social, economic, political, and security conse- quences of global migration of all types on key sending and receiving regions and countries. Other papers in the series include The Global Infectious Disease Threat (published in January ), and projects underway: Global Trends : Future Technologies, Global Trends : Future of Military Power, Global Trends : Geopolitics of Energy, Global Trends : Democratization, and Global Trends : Terrorism. These papers will be published in the course of the next year. The willingness and ability of governments to control migration. The scale of direct migration pressures on the United States; the impact of other countries migration policies on such pressures; and the extent to which some countries may try to use migration as leverage in bilateral relations. The broader implications for the United States of migration trends and the migration policies of other countries. The Estimate was produced under the auspices of Dr. David F. Gordon, National Intelligence Of cer for Economics and Global Issues. It was drafted principally by Deputy NIO, George C. Fidas. The Estimate espe- cially bene ted from a contribution by Dr. Demetrios Papademetriou, Co- Director of the International Migration Policy Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, and a related conference at Carnegie, as well as from critiques by experts at the American Enterprise Institute, RAND Corporation, and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. Comments and inquiries may be directed to Dr. Gordon at ( ) - or by e-mail at davidfg@nic.odci.gov. This and other papers in this series can be found at http://www.odci.gov/nic/nic_homepage/nic/publications/index.htm. John C. Gannon Chairman, National Intelligence Council Key Judgments Growing Global Migration and Its Implications for the United States During the next years, globalization, demographic imbalances between OECD and developing countries, and interstate and civil con icts will fuel increasing international migration, much of it illegal. Migration will have positive and negative consequences for sending and receiving countries alike. Other countries responses to migration issues will affect migration pressures on the United States and a broad range of US economic and secu- rity interests. Growing Migration Today, more than million people live outside their countries of birth and migrants comprise more than percent of the population in over countries. These numbers will grow as demographic push and pull fac- tors intensify: Some million people in developing countries will enter the job market each year through ; many will fail to nd work and some will emi- grate, whether legally or illegally. Illegal migration facilitated increasingly by alien-smuggling syndicates and corrupt government of cials will grow dramatically, matching or exceeding other forms of migration into many countries in Europe and in the more developed countries of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. Violent con icts, economic crises, and natural disasters in developing countries will often trigger mass migrations. By contrast, Europe and Japan face rapidly aging populations and shrink- ing labor forces, threatening the solvency of pension systems and con- straining economic growth in the absence of greater migration or other compensatory measures such as pension reform and increases in productivity. A wide range of constraints many of them resulting from recent global- ization and democratization trends will limit most countries willing- ness and ability to control migration ows across their borders. Migration s Mixed Impact For sending countries, emigration will relieve pressures from their unem- ployed youth, generate substantial remittances, and often provide them with leverage on receiving countries. Returning immigrants often will be agents of economic modernization and political liberalization. But emigra- tion also will result in the loss of skilled personnel especially in Sub- Saharan Africa, South and East Asia, and Russia while ethnic diasporas will sometimes be agents of extremism or separatism, as in the Balkans. For most receiving countries, immigration will provide demographic and economic vitality for those with aging populations even as it raises com- plex political and social integration challenges. Migration will ameliorate labor force and military manpower shortfalls and expand tax and consumer bases in developed countries. Immigrants initial strain on social, educational, and health services and their differing languages, cultures, and religious practices will evoke dis- crimination and hamper their further assimilation. The negative impact of large illegal or mass migration will be greatest in less developed receiving countries, straining local infrastructures, con- tributing to the spread of infectious diseases, and sometimes upsetting ethnic balances and contributing to con ict or violent regime change. Key Regional Trends Americas. Legal and illegal migration to the United States and within the region will continue to rise. Despite declining population growth and strong economic prospects in Mexico, persistent poverty and large wage differentials will further fuel large-scale emigration to the United States. Central America will remain the second-largest source of illegal migrants and its large alien-smuggling infrastructure also will make it a gateway for other US-bound immigrants, especially from South America and Asia. Political instability or economic decay in Cuba or Haiti could again lead to mass migration to the United States. Growing illegal migration within Latin America also will become a more contentious issue among governments. In Russia and other Eurasian states, weak immigration control regimes, tful economic development, ethnic con icts, and discrimination against minorities will sustain migration pressures that already have produced more than million mostly Russian migrants since the Soviet Union s breakup. Migration into Russia will partially compensate for but not offset labor force shortfalls and declining population. It also will add to welfare costs and may generate friction with other FSU states and with China over illegal immigration into the Russian Far East. The Middle East and Sub-Saharan Africa are the principal sources and places of refuge to some million refugees including Palestinians, Afghans, and Rwandan Hutus who will remain a source of instability and political polarization throughout these regions. The status of Palestinian refugees will continue to confound efforts toward a peace settlement. Intraregional migration will play a key role in the economies of more developed states, but these regions also will be a major source of migration to developed countries. In the European Union, countries will attempt to reconcile protection of national borders and cultural identity with the need to relieve growing demographic and labor market imbalances. Most EU countries are unlikely to opt for large numbers of new immigrants, while legal constraints against discrimination and laws favoring family reuni cation also preclude a for- tress approach. Instead, most are likely to opt for targeted migration in an effort to meet labor shortages in selected sectors while not unduly bur- dening national health and welfare systems or provoking a political back- lash. In Asia, populous countries such as China and India will be the source of growing regional and global migration ows. The advanced countries in the region with the exception of Australia and New Zealand will strongly resist integrating migrants socially and politically. Japan, which faces the greatest demographic imbalances, nonetheless will attempt to retain its current, highly cautious approach to immigration. Japan s pre- mium on ethnic homogeneity, few legal constraints against discrimination, high population density, and geographic insularity will reinforce this approach absent a sustained economic recovery. Should a recovery take hold, however, labor shortfalls may become so acute that Japan may shift eventually to a more open, targeted migration approach. Hesitant Japanese and EU Responses Portend Problems. Because tem- porary workers are likely to nd ways to remain inde nitely, shifting to the targeted migration course may not signi cantly curtail social and politi- cal tensions. Nor would it substantially expand European and Japanese labor forces or tax bases or provide relief for shrinking military recruitment pools, since temporary workers are excluded from military service and many illegal workers evade taxes. Implications of Global Migration Pressures for the United States. For- eign born residents now comprise nearly percent of the US population, up from percent in , and immigration will continue to climb during the next years. It will be driven by the attraction of the strong US econ- omy and political and economic dif culties in many developing and former Communist countries. Most experts believe that migration will continue to contribute signi cantly to nonin ationary economic growth and demo- graphic balance, despite some initially higher welfare costs and some downward pressure on wages in relevant sectors. Dif cult issues will none- theless arise: Manmade humanitarian emergencies and natural disasters, especially in Latin America, will challenge US immigration control efforts. The United States will remain vulnerable to attempts by some foreign governments to use the threat of mass migration as leverage in bilateral relations or to relieve domestic pressures. Attempts by other countries to prevent or sharply limit immigration will tend to channel migration pressures toward the United States. Transnational terrorist, narcotraf cking, and organized crime groups will seek to blend into and recruit among coethnic immigrant communities and exploit gaps in migration control efforts to ply their trades. On a broader level, the reluctance of key US economic partners and allies to substantially liberalize migration policies will place them at a competi- tive disadvantage with the United States in strategically important sectors such as information technology. According to the OECD, differing demo- graphic trends are a major factor in Europe s and Japan s weaker economic outlook in comparison with the United States during the next ve years. Restrictive migration policies, by limiting economic growth in Europe and Japan, may undermine efforts to overcome the imbalances among the advanced economies. Such policies also may skew the guns versus butter debate in these countries toward maintaining social expenditures at the expense of defense spending, weakening burden-sharing and the alliance system. Contents Preface Key Judgments Discussion The Demographics of International Migration Enduring Push and Pull Factors Driving Migration The Impact of Migration The EU and Japan: Responding to the Migration Dilemma Implications for the United States Annex Regional Migration Pro les The Americas Russia and the Other FSU States Middle East and North Africa Sub-Saharan Africa Asia/Paci c European Union FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) . . . . Palestinian, . Afghanistan, . Iraq, . Sierra Leone, . Somalia, . Sudan, . Serbia and Montenegro, . Angola, . Croatia, . Eritrea, . Burundi, . Bosnia and Herzegovina, . Other, . The Americas, . (US: . ) Africa, . (Guinea: . ) Middle East, . (Iran: . ) Europe, . (Germany: . ) South and Central Asia, . (Pakistan: . ) East Asia and Pacific, . (China: . ) Million (filing claims during - ) Canada France Germany UK US Million Refugees and Asylum-Seekers Worldwide in Need of Protection Asylum-Seekers in Selected Countries Figure Refugees and Asylum-Seekers by Host Region and Origin Refugees and Asylum-Seekers, by Host Region, Million Refugees and Asylum-Seekers, by Origin, Million (data in parentheses indicate country drawing largest number) Source: US Committee for Refugees, World Refugee Survery . DI Design Center/MPG AI - Discussion Growing Global Migration and Its Implications for the United States Globalization, population growth, and demo- graphic imbalances between OECD and devel- oping countries, and interstate and civil con icts are fueling increased international migration, much of it illegal. During the next years, migrants will seek to move to a grow- ing number of countries in both the industrial- ized and the developing world: To the United States and Canada primarily from Latin America, the Caribbean, and Asia. To Europe primarily from North Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and the post-Communist states of Eastern Europe and Eurasia. From the less to the more developed coun- tries in Sub-Saharan Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, Asia and the Paci c, and the former Communist world. This large-scale movement of people in search of a better life will bene t most sending coun- tries and those receiving countries that manage it effectively. At the same time, migration ows will exacerbate social and political ssures in many countries. As a major country of immi- gration, the United States will be signi cantly affected by growing global migration and the dif culties other countries will face in coping with it. The Demographics of International Migration More than million people nearly in of the world s population are migrants, including legal immigrants and temporary workers, other visa-holders, illegal immigrants, asylum-seekers, and refugees. Legal immi- grants admitted as temporary workers or to pro- mote family reuni cation comprise the largest portion, but illegal immigrants including asy- lum-seekers and visa-overstayers are increas- ing dramatically. Immigrants currently account for about per- cent of the population growth in most OECD countries, compared to percent during the - period. This share is likely to grow through , as continued migration and the initially higher fertility rates of immigrant pop- ulations outpace those of native-born popula- tions, most of which have fallen below replacement levels. Immigration to the United States has been on a steep upward climb for the past two decades, with the current foreign-born population more than doubling to nearly million or almost percent of the US population. Immigrants from the Americas and Asia account for about one-half and one-third, respectively, of the FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) USa Germany Japan UK Canadaa France Australiaa Netherlands Switzerland Belgium Sweden Luxembourg Percent of population that is foreign born . b . . . . Thousand Figure Legal Immigration in Selected OECD Countries, aIncludes naturalized citizens. The European countries do not include estimates of illegal aliens. Sources: OECD, US Bureau of the Census, Urban Institute. DI Design Center/MPG AI - . . . . . . Million Foreign-Born Population in the US, - Estimated . bData for : percent. Sources: US Bureau of the Census, Urban Institute. total. Immigration from EU countries has declined from percent in the s to percent in the last two decades and may drop even further. Surging Illegal Migration Most forms of international migration are on the rise, but illegal migration is growing the most rapidly. As emigration pressures intensify in sending countries, many receiving countries are tightening admissions requirements for legal migrants and asylum-seekers, while lack- ing the ability and, in some cases, the willing- ness to stop many, if not most, of those entering or staying on illegally. Indicators suggest that illegal migrants now comprise one-third to one-half of new entrants to most developed countries, includ- ing the United States up from about per- cent a decade ago. In some of the recent immigrant-receiving countries in Southern Europe and the more developed countries in South America and Sub-Saharan Africa, ille- gal immigrants probably comprise up to half or more of both entrants and stock. Despite stepped-up border security measures, the United States will remain hard-pressed to staunch the ow of illegal immigrants. More than . million aliens are arrested on the US-Mexico border annually many of them repeatedly and there were some , apprehensions of aliens from other key source countries in alone. Up to , initially manage to enter the United States and some , to , stay on inde nitely. Data from the US census suggest that the stock of illegal immigrants may total - million nearly double earlier estimates. Sharply lower approval rates for asylum-seek- ers, especially in the EU where some , sought asylum in , prompt more to attempt the illegal migration route. Moreover, most of the to percent that are rejected go under- ground. Large numbers of illegal immigrants emerge from hiding to apply for the periodic amnesties that receiving countries are increasingly offer- ing to deal with the deluge of illegal immi- grants. Nearly million have surfaced in southern European countries during the last ve years to accept such amnesties. In the United States, nearly million emerged to accept a amnesty and a more limited one in . Enduring Push and Pull Factors Driving Migration Both the push factors from migrant-sending countries and the pull factors from those receiv- ing migrants look set to persist and some will intensify even as many governments attempt to limit most forms of immigration. Despite such attempts, states will become less able to control migration ows across their borders. Push Factors Driving Migration Pressures to emigrate from developing coun- tries will remain intense, fueled by continued poverty, lack of jobs, population growth, politi- cal upheavals, and/or con icts in much of the developing world. At the same time, globaliza- tion will increase access to information about lifestyles and opportunities in industrialized countries abroad, while ongoing democratiza- tion will further loosen state restrictions on emigration. Some million new working age people in developing countries will enter the job market annually during the next years; many will fail to nd work and some will emigrate. Mexico, for example, will need to substan- tially increase its , annual new job creation rate to accommodate new labor force entrants totaling nearly million annually. North African countries must create more than , new jobs to absorb new entrants. The new states in the Caucasus also will need to create large numbers of new jobs to keep their young people from migrating in large numbers to Russia and elsewhere in Europe, where their job prospects are better. During the short- to medium-term, even rising wages in those developing countries experienc- ing economic growth will not be suf cient to substantially attenuate migration pressures, given continuing wage differentials with indus- trialized countries. A recent ILO-sponsored study noted that in the mid- s: Mexican migrants earned nine times as much in the United States as in their last job in Mexico. Polish construction workers earned over three times as much in Germany as in Poland. Indonesian laborers in Malaysia earned nearly eight times as much as in Indonesia. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Figure Top Ten Sources of Legal and Illegal Migration to the US Mexico, . China, . India, . Cuba, . Dominican Republic, . El Salvador, . Jamaica, . Mexico, . El Salvador, . Guatemala, . Canada, . Haiti, . Philippines, . Honduras, . Poland, . Sources of Legal Immigration, Percent Sources of Illegal Immigrants in the US, Percent Source: US Immigration and Naturalization Service, , . DI Design Center/MPG AI - Philippines, . Vietnam, . Russia . Nicaragua, . The Bahamas, . Other, . Other, . Mass migrations will also continue to be trig- gered by civil con icts and related economic uncertainty, such as in Colombia; deterioration of ecosystems and renewable resources so severe that it makes life unsustainable, such as in the Sahel region of Africa and parts of Cen- tral Asia; and the ight from various forms of natural and manmade humanitarian disasters, such as Hurricane Mitch in Central America and ethnic cleansing in the former Yugoslavia, respectively. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Figure Alien Smuggling Into the United States Honduras El Salvador Guatemala Dominican Republic Cuba Canada China Jamaica Colombia Haiti Nicaragua Thousand From to , the number of smuggled aliens apprehended as they were entering the US increased by percent to , . Source countries, excluding Mexico, with the highest number of apprehensions by the Immigration and Naturalization Service. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Sources: General Accounting Office, US Immigration and Naturalization Service. Alien Smuggling on the Rise Alien smuggling is now a $ billion to $ billion-a-year growth industry for migrant-smuggling groups that entails the transport of more than percent of ille- gal immigrants globally, often with the help of corrupt government of cials, according to International Labor Organi- zation (ILO) and other estimates. Smug- glers charge as little as $ for short trips across single borders, such as between Morocco and Spain, to as much as $ , for complex journeys from Asia to Western Europe and North Amer- ica. Although apprehension rates at major entry points into many developed coun- tries have increased several fold in recent years, police and immigration of cials in several countries believe that the majority manage to gain entry. Traf cking in women and children for purposes of labor and sexual exploita- tion also is increasing dramatically, with some , traf cked globally in , including some , to the United States, according to an US Intel- ligence Community sponsored study. Alien smuggling will have a corrosive effect on the political institutions of many countries as many of their law enforce- ment of cials succumb to bribery and con- tribute to a public perception that their governments are losing their capacity to control their countries borders and ensure public order. Pull Factors Driving Migration With their own populations aging, labor forces shrinking, and globalization eroding their abil- ity to police their borders, the OECD coun- tries particularly Japan and an increasingly integrating EU will face daunt- ing demographic, economic, and political dilemmas over immigration. Demographic and Economic Factors. The old-age dependency ratios of OECD coun- tries which re ect the ratio of the working age population to those aged or older will decline dramatically, according to US Census Bureau projections: from nearly to in FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Thousand Figure Illegal Migration Into the EU, - Sources: International Center for Migration Policy Development; The Economist estimates. DI Design Center/MPG AI - to nearly to by . In the EU and Japan combined, the ratio will fall from to in to to in . Thus, OECD countries will face pressures to rely on immigrants to ll a major portion of their labor market shortfalls, in addition to exploiting technology for greater productivity and the skills of women and older citizens. Aging populations will require substantially more spending for pensions and health care, ensuring that already large unfunded public pension de cits will require more public borrowing in the absence of robust economic growth and an expanding tax base. Political Factors. A wide range of political and legal constraints will limit the extent to which most OECD countries will be able or willing to adopt harsh measures against illegal or other would-be immigrants. The reduction of controls over cross-border economic transactions will limit the ability of states to shape migration ows. Within the EU in particular, the Schengen Agreement generally allows for unhindered travel across internal EU borders after initial entry into a Schengen member country. Attempts to expel short-term or illegal migrants, while appealing to antimigrant ele- ments in the local population, would incur opposition from the local business commu- nity and human rights groups, as well as risk damaging relations with governments of the sending countries. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) On December , the US Coast Guard took custody of the antiquated shing boat, the Wing Fung Ling, which carried Chinese aliens and eight crewmembers, about miles off Guatemala s Paci c coast. Some , to , Chinese aliens entered the US illegally in . Figure The Wing Fung Ling Incident DI Design Center/MPG ID - Once established in receiving countries, immigrant communities will serve as mag- nets for additional members of their national or ethnic groups. The priority that immigra- tion laws give to family reuni cation will reinforce this process and make it dif cult for governments to shift to alternative migration streams from other countries and regions. The increasing ease of travel, communica- tion, and access to ethnic media, moreover, will enable those who do emigrate to main- tain strong ties with their countries of origin, generating further ows. The Impact of Migration Migration will have both positive and negative consequences for sending and receiving states alike, but on balance the bene ts will outweigh the costs for most countries. Impact On Sending Countries On the positive side, emigration will help relieve some social and political pressures from the large, unemployed and restless youth cohorts of poor sending countries. Moreover, FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Figure Global Trafficking in Women and Children in , by Source Source: US Government. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Total = , FSU/Eastern Europe, Southeast Asia/ East Asia, Other, North America Latin America Africa Middle East South Asia, Bangladesh, Nepal, Russia, Ukraine, Thailand, Burma, Percent FIGURE GRAPHIC # FOLDOUT Source: US Government. Illegal migrants Trafficking Flows Women and children Boundary representation is not necessarily authoritative. I N D I A N O C E A N N O R T H A T L A N T I C O C E A N S O U T H A T L A N T I C O C E A N ARCTIC OCEAN ARCTIC OCEAN N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N N O R T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N S O U T H P A C I F I C O C E A N Figure Illegal Migration Flows and Trafficking in Women and Children DI Cartography Center/MPG AI - immigrant remittances and returning immi- grants will provide important balance of pay- ments help, direct investments, and useful skills in their home countries. Among key sending countries, Mexico s pop- ulation growth from to was percent smaller than it would have been with- out the net emigration of . million people. The total value of registered immigrant remittances grew from nearly $ billion in to almost $ billion in , according to a World Bank study, and much higher if transfers through informal channels were included. Remittances exceed the value of foreign investment in many countries and have a mul- tiplier effect on the broader economy. Mexi- can immigrant remittances from the United States to Mexico now total some $ billion annually and those from the Moroccan diaspora to Morocco some $ billion. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) DI Design Center/MPG AI - Figure Regional Population by Age Group: and Source: US Bureau of the Census. Billion . . . . . North America Sub-Saharan Africa Latin America and the Caribbean Russia and Eurasia Western Europe Middle East and North Africa South Asia East and Southeast Asia, Oceania Young (ages - ) Working ( - ) Old ( +) Immigrant populations can often act as liberalizing and modernizing forces in their native lands, particularly at times of political transition. Returning expatriates from North America and the EU played a key role in the establish- ment and consolidation of democratic rule in southern Europe in the s and s. Since the Cold War s end, returning expatri- ates have played a similar role in several former Communist countries, most recently in Serbia, where the diaspora generally sup- ported the opposition movement that ousted Slobodan Milosevic from power. Democratization and economic development in several Asian and Latin American countries similarly has been spearheaded by Western-educated leaders and elites. For their part, most sending country govern- ments will be reluctant to discourage emigra- tion because of its many economic and political bene ts, ranging from foreign remittances to in uence in countries where they have growing diasporas. Such governments will also increas- ingly attempt to harness the political in uence of these diasporas by encouraging them to lobby for their native country s interests. A growing number are offering dual citizen- ship to their diasporas in an effort to retain and strengthen ties with them. Ethnic politics and lobbying will loom increasingly large in the EU, as members large immigrant communities become enfran- chised and gain political and economic in uence. On the negative side, emigration will drain some sending countries of an increasing por- tion of their small, highly educated elites. There are at least . million skilled expatriates from developing countries employed in Western Europe, the United States, Australia, and Japan. More than , students from Note: Widely disparate wages are a principal driver of intraregional and global migration. Source: Peter Stalker. Workers Without Frontiers. International Labor Organization. . Table (U) Hourly Labor Costs in Manufacturing in Selected Countries, - US $ Country United States . . Canada . . Australia . . Europe France . . Germany . . Italy . . United Kingdom . . Spain . . Switzerland . . Poland NA . Russia NA . Asia Japan . . China . . South Korea . . Philippines . . Indonesia . . India . . developing, Communist, and former Commu- nist countries are studying overseas, roughly two-thirds of whom do not return. Although East Asia and South Asia are the principal sources for such professionals and students, Africa has been hardest hit proportionately, losing some , profes- sionals and some , Ph.D. s during the Globalization Fueling Migration Globalization expanded international trade, nance, investment, and information ows is likely to accentuate economic inse- curity and migration pressures in many developing countries during the short- to mid-term. Sudden economic emergencies such as the debt and energy crises of the s and s and the currency crises of the s resulted both in stepped-up migration to OECD countries and in large- scale expulsions of immigrants from the more advanced developing countries. The Mexican peso crisis of , for exam- ple, contributed to a surge in illegal immi- gration to the United States. In Asia, the - nancial crisis prompted Malaysia, Thailand, and South Korea, to expel substantial numbers of for- eign workers. At the same time, globalization will continue to increase demand for high-tech and other professionals for whom developed countries will continue to compete in order to fuel their information technology and other strategic sectors. The EU will face a shortage of sev- eral hundred thousand high-tech workers annually. Germany, alone, will need some , additional high-tech workers by , according to the President of Siemens Corporation. High-tech workers and entrepreneurs will be increasingly prepared to emigrate from countries such as India, those in East Asia, and Russia, provided that immigration laws in industrialized countries become suf - ciently exible to permit their entry. Australia, Canada, the Nordic countries, and the UK are opening up to high-tech immigration, albeit oftentimes in the face of political and labor union resistance. Japan and continental Europe are more resistant; the German Government only recently succeeded in securing parliamen- tary approval for the admission of , high-tech workers annually after a lively debate. last decade, according to the UN Human Development Report. The emigration of over . million generally well-educated Russian Jews to Israel, the EU, and North America over the last decade will continue to be a drag on Russia s economic recovery, while the trickle of Russian scientists and engineers emigrating to coun- tries such as Iran, Iraq, and North Korea will enable these countries to speed up their WMD efforts if it turns into a more substan- tial ow. Although diasporas often pick up both demo- cratic political attitudes and technical skills while abroad, some also have a nationalist bent that inclines them to support and nance ultra- nationalist causes, including armed con ict. In recent years, some Balkan and East Afri- can diasporas have stoked ethnic and nation- alist passions that have prolonged con ict and made political resolution more dif cult. Impact on Receiving Countries On the positive side, migration will offer a source of demographic and economic dyna- mism for aging developed countries that will replenish their youth cohorts and expand their shrinking labor and military recruitment pools. It also will expand their tax and consumer bases that are key to maintaining scal balance, the social contract, and economic growth. Immigrants in EU countries earn at least $ billion annually and pay $ billion in taxes, compared to $ billion they receive in welfare, according to a European economic institute. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Short-distance migration Long-distance migration Long-distance high skill Migration propensity Average real income per capita Thousand US $ The migration hump refers to the tendency of economic development to increase emigration initially. It disrupts traditional economic relationships and noncompetitive sectors and also provides prospective emigrants with the economic means to emigrate. Figure The Migration Hump DI Design Center/MPG AI - Source: Peter Stalker. Workers Without Frontiers. International Labor Organization. . During the last seven years, the number of self-employed immigrants in these countries has increased at two-and-a-half times the rate of those that are native born. A recent British Ministry of Defense study projects a substantial military recruitment pool shortfall during the next years if present demographic trends persist. On the negative side, immigration and refugee ows sometimes will change the balance of ethnic and political power within and among nations, especially in developing countries. Large-scale ows of migrants and refugees some recent, some decades old, and some yet to take place will provoke political instability and con ict. The recent military interventions in Fiji and Cote d Ivoire; ethnic con icts in the former Yugoslavia, the former Soviet Union, eastern Indonesia, and Democratic Republic of the Congo; and the Arab-Israeli dispute have resulted in part from large-scale migration and refugee ows. Migration will continue to pose particularly complex policy, management, and control challenges for OECD countries that many will be hard pressed to address. Immigrants will oftentimes strain social, educational, and health services in host countries, as well as challenge their political tolerance and cultural security, thereby accentuating social and political tensions. Unemployment among EU immigrants from outside of the EU is double that of immi- grants from other EU countries, according to a European research institute. Such immigrants also will be increasingly dif cult and probably less willing to assimi- late, owing to wide-ranging language, cul- tural, and religious differences in relation to their host societies, and the ease of access to their countries and cultures of origin. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) Figure Annual Working-Age Migration Required To Maintain Old-Age Dependency Ratios for the EU, Japan, and Russia at Levels Million Source: US Bureau of the Census. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Russia Japan EU ( ) Without this number of working-age immigrants, the number of working-age people supporting the elderly will decrease from an average of -to- in , to -to- in in the EU and Japan. It will remain nearly constant at -to- in Russia owing to shorter lifespans. Estimated working-age net migration in Number of foreign workers age - required to support age + population in FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) . . . . . China India Taiwan South Korea Canada Germany Japan Turkey Mexico Brazil India China, Hong Kong, Taiwan Philippines Canada UK Thousand Thousand Nationality of Non-US Citizens Earning Ph.D. s in the US, a Working Immigrants Entering the US Between and March With a Bachelor s Degree or More Figure Developing Country Brain Drain to the United States aPercent of Ph.D. recipients reporting postdoctoral location as the US in : China, ; India, . Sources: Institute of International Education and National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago, Urban Institute, and US Bureau of the Census. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Developed countries Developing country students are the largest group of foreigners who earn Ph.D. s in the US. Most study science and engineering and stay in the US after receiving their degrees. Developing countries Illegal immigrants often are willing to work long hours for lower pay, putting pressure on host countries social and labor standards, even as immigrants meet the labor needs of these economies. The EU and Japan: Responding to the Migration Dilemma Balancing the demographic and economic imperatives to replenish aging labor markets and pro-immigrant pressures from the business community against longstanding cultural traditions and the largely anti-immigrant senti- ments of electorates and labor unions will pose daunting choices for Japan and many EU coun- tries. In the EU, concerns about cultural identity will weigh heavily on migration policies, but EU FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) UK Italy France Germany Canada Japan US Projected By comparison, total G- public spending on defense, education, and R&D was . percent of GDP in . Aging population will require much more public spending for pensions and health care. Percent of GDP Figure Public Spending on Pensions and Health Benefits, and Source: Peter G. Peterson. Gray Down. Random House. . DI Design Center/MPG AI - members are unlikely to adopt a fortress approach entailing highly restrictive immigra- tion and integration policies owing to legal con- straints against discrimination, labor imbalances, and their reluctance and inability to prevent family reuni cation and illegal migration respectively. Instead, most EU countries are likely to move toward a targeted migration approach that would attempt to attenuate labor shortages in selected sectors such as high tech and services with modest increases in overall migration, while not unduly burdening national health and welfare systems. Japan will attempt to retain its highly cautious approach to immigration. Although Japan faces the greatest need for workers, it places a pre- mium on ethnic and cultural homogeneity, has few of the constraints against discrimination, and is highly conscious of its already high pop- ulation density. Further, Japan s geographic insularity better enables it to limit illegal immi- gration. Should Japan s economy return to sus- tained growth, however, labor shortfalls may become so acute that Japan may shift eventu- ally to a more open, targeted migration approach. Implications for the United States The rise in global migration will have both direct and indirect implications for the United States and for US national security. The attrac- tion of a strong US economy and persistent political and economic dif culties in many places around the world will ensure that the United States continues to draw large migration ows. Moreover, how well other countries han- dle their own migration issues will affect subse- quent migration pressures on the United States and will also have broader implications for important US economic and security interests. Immigration will enable the United States to maintain a more balanced demographic pro- le than most EU states and Japan. Despite some initially higher social welfare costs and some downward pressure on wages, most experts believe that migration facilitates sustained, nonin ationary growth. In the s, nearly percent of new US jobs including those for software engineers were lled by immigrants. According to the OECD, differing demographic trends are the main source of a rosier economic growth out- look for the United States during the next ve years in comparison with the EU and Japan. Nonetheless, dif cult issues will arise. Persis- tent poverty in Mexico and Central Amer- ica along with natural disasters and con icts in Latin America more generally will strain immigration control efforts; for- eign governments such as in Cuba or Haiti will sometimes threaten to allow mass migra- tion; and terrorists and narcotraf ckers will look for ways to evade US immigration controls. Forced or Large-Scale Migration Civil con icts and humanitarian or natural disasters, especially in neighboring countries, could generate sudden and large-scale migra- tion ows into the United States. US immigra- tion control efforts will be especially hard- pressed to staunch such ows. The civil con ict and economic uncertainty in Colombia that have displaced some mil- lion people already have produced a near doubling of visa applications that sometimes total , monthly. Illegal migration also will rise if the con ict and related economic problems intensify. Economic uncertainty in Ecuador, likewise, has contributed to a sub- stantial increase in US-bound illegal immi- grants in the last two years. If Mexico experiences another economic crisis, a further surge in migration to the United States would be likely. Almost any scenario involving a change of government in Cuba would have the potential to generate a substantial migration compo- nent at least during its early phases. A dramatic deterioration of the political, human rights, and economic situation in Haiti could lead to a repeat of the immigration crises of the rst half of the s. Hesitant EU and Japanese Responses Portend Problems In Europe and Japan the targeted migra- tion option would ameliorate but would not resolve demographic and labor force imbal- ances or substantially curb immigration- related social and political tensions. Both EU members and Japan would also have to look to other politically controversial mea- sures such as pension reform, additional social safety net cuts, and more substantial economic restructuring and improvements in productivity to sustain scal balance and promote economic growth. Japan and EU members already spend twice as much on pensions as a share of GDP than does the United States. Yet pen- sion reforms, such as supplementing public pay-as-you go pension programs with pri- vately funded schemes, are only now being considered while politically controversial pension cuts and increased age require- ments generally are being deferred. Improvements in productivity to compen- sate for declining labor forces also may prove inadequate. The EU and Japan are investing in information technology at half the US rate. Because temporary workers in the EU and Japan are likely to nd ways to remain inde nitely, moreover, this course would not substantially curtail social and politi- cal tension in the absence of better social and political integration of immigrant pop- ulations. It would also fail to provide relief to their demographically driven military manpower dilemma, since temporary workers and noncitizens in general are excluded from military service. Central America, the Caribbean, and much of the Andean region are highly prone to major natural disasters. The devastation in Central America caused by Hurricane Mitch in October caused an out ow of tens of thousands of people from the four affected countries to the United States within four months. Emigration as a Political Tool The United States will remain vulnerable to explicit or implicit threats by foreign govern- ments to use illegal and especially mass emi- gration as leverage in bilateral relations or to reduce political pressures arising from domes- tic policy failures. Although a - agreement granting up to , visas to Cubans annually has largely staunched the ow of illegal migration, fully , Cubans apply for visas annually, and Castro could again exploit this widespread desire by Cubans to emigrate as in and . Pent-up migration pressures could rise even higher in Haiti, where the Aristide govern- ment could encourage mass migration should economic conditions deteriorate further and tensions with the United States grow over such issues as human rights. China is capable of facilitating the efforts of substantial numbers of potential emigrants, many of whose ultimate destination would be the United States to which some , to , already attempt to emigrate illegally each year. Spillover From Other Regions To a lesser extent, the United States also will remain vulnerable to at least some added migration pressures as a result of decisions by other immigrant-receiving countries to shut down or severely limit immigration. While legal and political constraints would prevent most OECD countries from taking draconian measures to stop or expel immigrants, many developing countries without such constraints have and may again take such actions in response to economic and other crises. Attempts by Asian countries and the more developed South American countries to pre- vent or sharply limit immigration from poorer neighbors will tend to channel migration pressures toward the United States. Migration s Impact on Broader US Interests The impact of other countries likely migration policies on broader US interests will be mixed. The hesitancy of key US partners substantially to liberalize their immigration policies espe- cially if combined with continuing reluctance to undertake major reforms of their pension and social welfare systems will place them at a competitive economic disadvantage with the United States. On the other hand, their hesi- tancy to undertake immigration and economic reforms will lead to wage-induced in ationary pressures and excessive borrowing to shore up budget de cits, raising interest rates and con- straining economic growth. This, in turn, will undermine efforts to promote a sound world economy. To the extent that key US allies and economic partners opt for maintaining greater social and cultural cohesion at the expense of immigration and more extensive economic and scal reform, these nations will turn inward, exacerbating internal tensions and skewing the guns versus butter debate toward greater social expendi- tures. Sudden or large-scale migration ows into US allies and economic partners would most likely strengthen extremist parties and could increase anti-immigrant violence. Reduced defense spending and shrinking mil- itary manpower pools may limit the willing- ness and ability of some US allies to share the defense burden. The same internal pressures would also con- strain resources for foreign assistance and a wide range of international activities of inter- est to the United States. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) C a r i b b e a n S e a G u l f o f M e x i c o N o r t h A t l a n t i c O c e a n N o r t h P a c i f i c O c e a n Hudson Bay Labrador Sea Mexico U n i t e d S t a t e s The Bahamas Belize Honduras Nicaragua Guatemala C a n a d a Costa Rica Panama Colombia Venezuela Trinidad and Tobago Cuba Island of Newfoundland Puerto Rico (U.S.) Guadeloupe (France) British Virgin Is. (U.K.) Virgin Is. (U.S.) Martinique (France) Barbados Grenada Jamaica Haiti Dominican Republic El Salvador St. Pierre and Miquelon (FRANCE) Caracas Santo Domingo Panama St. John's Calgary Quebec Vancouver Halifax Winnipeg Montreal Seattle Boston Portland Toronto Minneapolis New York Detroit Milwaukee Philadelphia Chicago Columbus Indianapolis Salt Lake City San Francisco St. Louis Denver Atlanta Los Angeles Phoenix San Diego Tijuana Dallas Jacksonville Mexicali El Paso Ciudad Juarez Houston New Orleans Miami Monterrey Matamoros Mazatlan Merida Leon Guadalajara Veracruz Puebla Oaxaca Acapulco Happy Valley- Goose Bay San Antonio Ottawa Nassau Havana Port-au- Prince Kingston Mexico Belmopan Tegucigalpa Guatemala Managua San Salvador Washington, D.C. Cleveland Baltimore Cancun San Jose Edmonton Port-au- Prince St. Pierre and Miquelon (FRANCE) Caracas Santo Domingo Panama St. John's Calgary Quebec Vancouver Halifax Winnipeg Montreal Seattle Boston Portland Toronto Minneapolis New York Detroit Milwaukee Philadelphia Chicago Columbus Indianapolis Salt Lake City San Francisco St. Louis Denver Atlanta Los Angeles Phoenix San Diego Tijuana Dallas Jacksonville Mexicali El Paso Ciudad Juarez Houston New Orleans Miami Monterrey Matamoros Mazatlan Merida Leon Guadalajara Veracruz Puebla Oaxaca Acapulco Happy Valley- Goose Bay San Antonio Ottawa Nassau Havana Kingston Mexico Belmopan Tegucigalpa Guatemala Managua San Salvador Washington, D.C. Cleveland Baltimore Cancun San Jose Edmonton Figure Estimated Annual Illicit Chinese Migration to the United States DI Cartography Center/MPG AI - , , , , , , (from Guam) , Kilometers Miles Via air Via land Via sea Arrows on the map add up to , . An interagency assessment estimates that the flow in was , to , . Source: US Government. Other migration ows will directly or indirectly challenge US military forces, border defenses, and law enforcement capabilities. Authoritarian regimes will remain capable of ethnic cleansing and other forms of repression and economic mismanagement, leading to large and sudden population out- ows that will create pressures for US diplo- matic and possibly military involvement. As illegal migration increases, there will be increased demands on border control and other law enforcement agencies. Transnational terrorists, narcotics traf ckers, and organized crime groups will seek to blend into and recruit among coethnic and other immigrant communities and exploit gaps in migration control efforts to ply their trades. Increased migration and variances in transit patterns will further exacerbate the threat from the spread of infectious diseases. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) , , Migrants by fiscal year a Reaching US shores Interdicted by US Coast Guard The number of Cubans trying to reach the US through alien smuggling has increased steadily since Havana and Washington signed bilateral migration accords in and committing the Cuban Government to curb illegal migration in return for , visas annually for Cubans waiting to emigrate to the US. Figure Cuban Migration: Fewer Rafters, Increased Smuggling aOctober through April only. Sources: US Coast Guard, and Immigration and Naturalization Service. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Annex Regional Migration Pro les The Americas Migration pressures on the United States and within the region will continue to rise during the next years. Differential rates of popula- tion growth, recurring political and economic crises and natural disasters, as well as personal insecurity caused by widespread poverty and increasing crime will propel more Latin Ameri- cans to attempt to emigrate. Most countries will be unable to control the ow of people into the United States. Although declining population growth and strong economic prospects in Mexico will gradually diminish migration pressures, dis- parities in living standards, US demand for labor, and family ties will sustain Mexico s rank as the single largest source of legal and illegal immigration to the United States. Economic and demographic pressures in Central America and tful migration manage- ment and control efforts ensure that the region also will remain a large source and transit point for illegal immigrants attempting to enter the United States. While Cuba generally has honored its obliga- tion in the - immigration accord with the United States to prevent illegal departures in return for a set legal quota of up to , annually, Castro could contemplate violating the accord during periods of increased tension. The long US-Canadian border will make it a major transit point for illegal, mainly Asian, immigrants bound for the United States, although close US-Canadian cooperation will limit such entries. Illegal migration also will become a more con- tentious issue among Latin American govern- ments. The growth of alien-smuggling networks throughout the Americas will further compli- cate migration management and control efforts. It will exacerbate problems along US borders as indicated by the near doubling of arrests of smuggled aliens in recent years and else- where in the region and also will act as a cor- rupting in uence on law enforcement of cials. Russia and the Other FSU States Migration pressures have become more intense since the demise of the Soviet Union and resulting change in inter-ethnic balances and loosening of immigration controls. Migration ows into Russia will compensate somewhat for but will not offset Russia s labor force shortfalls and declining population. They also will add to social welfare costs and have the potential to generate further friction within Russia, with other FSU states, and possibly with China in the Russian Far East. Continuing poor economic conditions and political insta- bility also may lead to a more substantial exo- dus of FSU populations to EU and other developed states. Well over million people already have moved across the international boundaries between FSU states, often under duress. These include some million ethnic Russians and non-Russian economic immigrants entering Russia from other FSU states and some . mil- lion non-Russians leaving Russia for such states. Over million, often well-educated ethnic Germans and Russian Jews, have left the FSU for Germany, Israel, and elsewhere. Although intra-FSU migration has peaked, migration strains and ows will persist, arising from a number of sources: Continued pressures on Russians in many states to emigrate or assimilate. A large-scale internal migration of Russians from Siberia and the Far East to European Russia. The illegal migration of ethnic Chinese into the Russian Far East, currently estimated to total nearly , , which sets the stage for increased tensions. The integration of refugees escaping ethnic and religious con icts in the Caucasus and Central Asia. An ecologically driven movement of people thus far numbering , escaping natural and manmade humanitarian disasters. A substantial movement of illegal immigrants into and out of the FSU totaling several hun- dred thousand annually, often with the help of alien-smugglers, women-traf ckers, and cor- rupt government of cials. Migration s Mixed Impacts. The return to Rus- sia of large numbers of ethnic Russians from the other former republics, together with the growing number of migrant workers from even more impoverished FSU states, has increased public disenchantment and added to the Rus- sian Government s many woes by contributing to competition for scarce jobs and public resources. But over the longer term, Russia s aging and declining population will make it a net bene ciary of migration from within the FSU which the Putin government looks set to encourage. The poorer FSU states in the Cauca- sus with younger and growing populations already are experiencing both the positive results of emigration, such as remittances, and negative ones, such as loss of skilled people, to Russia and elsewhere. Middle East and North Africa North Africa and the Middle East are both sending and receiving subregions. As a whole, the region is second only to Sub-Saharan Africa as a generator of refugees, who will remain a source of political instability and ille- gal migration. North Africa is the principal source for the EU s Muslims, and its poor opportunity struc- ture and continuing population growth ensure that it will remain so. Despite the relaxation of some EU exclusionary laws and $ billion in aid to North African countries since as part of an initiative aimed at socioeconomic development and weakening migration pres- sures, these pressures will persist. The Persian Gulf States. Intraregional migra- tion, primarily in the form of contract laborers initially from Egypt and more recently from the South Asian region plays an instrumental role in the economies of the oil-producing Gulf states where they comprise nearly half the pop- ulation. These contract laborers have virtually no access to social welfare and political partici- pation or to permanent residence or citizenship. Israel. In Israel, friction among European, non- European, and more recent Russian-Jewish immigrant populations will persist. The mil- lion Russian Jews are a new source of eco- nomic dynamism; they also are inclined to caution in the peace process. Immigration to Israel will remain a neuralgic issue for Palestin- ians and Arab states in the region, who see it as fueling perceived Israeli territorial ambitions. Similarly, the prospect of Palestinian refugees returning to the region and the high fertility of Source: Russian State Statistical Committee. Table Migration in the Former Soviet Union, - Net Migration, - Net Migration of Russians, - Thousands Percentage of population Thousands Percentage of Russian population Russia , . , . . Ukraine . - . - . Belarus . - . - . Moldova - - . - . - . Latvia - - . - . - . Lithuania - - . - . - . Estonia - - . - . - . Armenia - . - . - . Azerbaijan - - . - . - . Georgia - - . - . - . Kazakhstan - , - . - , . - . Kyrgyzstan - - . - . - . Tajikistan - - . - . - . Turkmenistan . - . - . Uzbekistan - - . - . - . Palestinians generally will increase Israeli con- cerns. The prospect of changed ethnic balances will remain a dif cult issue in negotiating a settlement. Surging Refugee Populations. The large refu- gee populations in the northern tier states of Iraq, Iran, and Afghanistan, along with the longstanding Palestinian refugees scattered throughout the region, now total some mil- lion. They will remain a source of instability and friction within and between states, while also providing recruits for terrorist groups in the region. FIGURE GRAPHIC # ( p X p) North Africa Middle East Sub-Saharan Africa The steady rise in working-age populations and the poor prospects for employment in most of Africa and the Middle East will increase migration pressures. Figure Working-Age Population in North Africa, Middle East, and Sub-Saharan Africa, - Million Source: US Bureau of the Census. DI Design Center/MPG AI - Sub-Saharan Africa Migration in Sub-Saharan Africa is primarily intraregional and consists of a growing number of economic, primarily illegal, migrants and of refugees escaping the many civil con icts and wars in the region. International migration to other regions, mainly the EU but also to North America, is likely to grow commensurate with Africa s youth bulge, poor economic prospects, and continuing ethnic and cross-border con- icts. Refugees. There are several million refugees in Sub-Saharan Africa concentrated in the west- ern, central, and eastern regions where they will further exacerbate ethnic and political polarization and provide recruits for the many con icts in the region. They also will remain a strain on already meager host government capacities to sustain local populations. Economic Migrants. Sub-Saharan Africa has long witnessed movements of migrant workers, particularly to C te d Ivoire and South Africa. The estimated to million foreign immi- grants in Cote d Ivoire, totaling one quarter to one-half of its population, are creating an anti-migrant backlash that contributed to the short-lived military coup in December and persistent political instability since then. The issue of ethnic origin and citizenship also is a destabilizing component in the politics of neighboring countries. South Africa is home to some - million ille- gal immigrants from throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, a ow that is likely to continue and add to social and economic pressures as well as to the spread of HIV/AIDS. South Africa also will be challenged to limit growing elite emigration to developed countries. Asia/Paci c Asian countries vast populations and varying economic and demographic conditions ensure the region will confront intense intraregional migration pressures and also will contribute substantially to global migration. Populous countries, such as the Philippines, India, Bang- ladesh, Pakistan, Indonesia, Thailand, and China, account for the growing migrant ows within the region, which totaled at least . million in , mainly to the fast growing economies of Hong Kong, Taiwan, South Korea, and Singapore. Thailand, Burma, and Malaysia are both sending and receiving coun- tries. With China estimated to have more than million underemployed urban workers and Indonesia facing growing civil and secessionist con ict, the potential for continued emigra- tion and potentially unsettling regional and global rami cations remains substantial. Increasingly, Australia and New Zealand are becoming destinations for large numbers of legal and illegal Asian immigrants in response to an earlier loosening of immigration laws and growing public tolerance for Asian immigrants. More so than in other regions, Asian migration is a regulated industry that both sending and receiving country governments attempt to manage to their advantage. Many countries have imposed tight residency requirements and severe penalties on employers of illegal work- ers. Nonetheless, in Asia, too, illegal migration is on the rise and may soon approach levels in the EU and North America. Continued migra- tion and minimal integration of immigrants will remain a source of tension and con ict throughout Southeast Asia in particular. Japan s Conundrum. Japan has the world s most pressing need for immigrants to address impending labor force shortfalls. It would need over , working age immigrants annually just to maintain its working age population at levels and some . million annually to maintain its old-age dependency ratio at levels, according to UN projections. The pre- cipitous aging of Japan s population will gener- ate severe scal strains; the OECD estimates that Japan s pension expenditures will nearly double from to , compared to a growth of percent for the United States. Such growth in social expenditures also will constrain defense spending and force modernization. Japan continues to resist greater immigration, with basically no net immigration in . Although it cautiously increased its immigrant population during the robust economic growth and severe labor shortages of the late s, Japan has among the lowest number of foreign-born among OECD countries at about percent of the population. Japan s immigration regime makes naturalization almost impossible. Even work and study permits are dif cult to secure and discourage prolonged stays, thereby encouraging a small but growing ow of illegal immigrants totaling some , , according to ILO estimates. Japan has turned to several alternative methods to defer a decision in favor of more open immi- gration or integration of current immigrants. Japanese efforts have focused on enticing the more than million overseas Japanese, particu- larly in Latin America, to return; broadening opportunities for women somewhat; and exporting labor through foreign direct invest- ment. These measures have produced only modest labor gains. European Union With most EU members of cially closed to most forms of legal immigration, illegal migra- tion and the overstaying of asylum-seekers and visa-holders will loom increasingly large and a Number of workers by country of origin (thousands, latest year available, estimates of undocumented workers in parentheses). Source: Peter Stalker. Workers Without Frontiers. International Labor Organization. . Table Legal and Illegal Foreign Workers in Asian Labor-Importing Countries, Importing Country Total Foreign Workersa (thousands) Indonesia Philippines Thailand China Other Asia Malaysia , ( , ) ( ) ( ) NA Thailand , NA NA Singapore NA Japan , NA ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) Hong Kong (China) NA NA Taiwan NA South Korea ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) FIGURE GRAPHIC# ( p X p) threaten to overwhelm the EU s emerging com- mon immigration regime and member state regimes. Illegal immigration has grown ninefold in less than a decade to some , in , compared to less than , in , according to one estimate by the International Center for Migration Policy Development. Asylum-seekers totaled nearly , in . China s Migration Challenge With an estimated , or more Chi- nese emigrating annually, as many as half of them illegally, and million under- employed urban workers, China will remain a major uncertainty in the global migration picture. Social, political, and economic develop- ments in China have the potential to cre- ate a spontaneous mass migration emergency that could spiral out of control. Such an emergency could result from a sudden economic crisis caused by a fail- ure of the banking system; continued free market reforms leading to massive unemployment and underemployment and a rapid in ux to urban areas; or a crisis of legitimacy for the regime lead- ing to widespread unrest. China also could encourage migration to relieve socioeconomic and political pres- sures. Figure Legal and Illegal Foreigners in Japan by Country of Origin South Korea, China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, Brazil, Philippines, US, Peru, Other, South Korea, China, Philippines, Thailand, Iran, Malaysia, Peru, Pakistan, Indonesia, Bangladesh, Other, Legal Foreign Population, Percent Total: . million Illegal Foreign Workers, a Percent Total: , aNumbers represent workers against whom deportation procedures were intiated. Source: Demetrios G. Papademetriou, and Kimberley A., Hamilton. Reinventing Japan: Immigration s Role in Shaping Japan s Future. Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. . DI Design Center/MPG AI - FIGURE GRAPHIC# ( p X p) Figure Net Legal Migration Into EU Countries, Thousand Germany UK Italy France Netherlands Greece Portugal Ireland Austria Sweden Belgium Denmark Finland Luxembourg Spain (no data) Source: Business Week. DI Design Center/MPG AI - FIGURE GRAPHIC# ( p X p) As percent of GDP, As percent of total social protection benefits Pension Spending, Italy France Germany EU Sweden UK Spain Ireland People Over Age as a Percent of Total Age to Figure Aging Trends and Pension Spending in the EU Sources: US Bureau of the Census, and The Economist. DI Design CenterMPG AI - The EU will remain vulnerable geographically to mass migrations sparked by pervasive con- ict and economic hardship in nearby regions. Such factors already have produced nearly a million refugees and asylum-seekers from the Balkans within EU borders and this ow likely will persist. Continuing economic pressures and political upheaval in parts of the FSU and North Africa also will produce a steady ow. Dif cult Choices Ahead. Most EU states will face politically painful dilemmas requiring them to choose among substantially more lib- eral immigration and integration policies or alternative economic and social policy remedies for their looming labor and scal shortfalls. A failure to permit substantially increased migration is likely to lead to growing labor and tax base shortfalls. It also threatens to undermine social safety nets and constrain defense spending and force modernization in the absence of other compensatory measures such as substantial pension reform and improvements in productivity. The EU s looming demographic and labor force imbalances are beginning to generate a reappraisal of its restrictive immigration policies among the business community in particular. Segments of the media and political parties also support an expanded temporary worker and limited permanent immigrant pro- grams. Most recently, the European Commis- sion called for expanded immigration to ensure future growth and ensure the social contract. The beginnings of this trend are visible in the move by the German Government to loosen citizenship requirements and initiate a limited visa program for high-tech workers; the Swiss Government s success in defeating a referen- dum to limit immigrants to percent of the population; and the British Government s loosening of requirements for some immigrant categories.