NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL ASSESSMENT Febrnary NICA - Sub-Saharan Africa: Progressive Democracy Protesters Joining Global Campaigns (U) Key Takeaway (T > Progressive democracy protesters in Sub Saharan Africa have increasingly agitated for more accountable governance during the past decade, leading to pockets of democratic reform as well as violence and repression. (T ) Several progressive civil society groups and activists who have been at the forefront of these protests have begun to form bridges to international movements. In doing so, they have leveraged additional resources to increase the pressure on their governments and shared their decades of post-colonial advocacy experience with the global prodemocracy community. African activists' increasingly close ties to US counterparts - provide opportunities to advance democratic and governance programming in the region but also could cause African governments to accuse the United States of undermining their authority. During the past decade, Sub Saharan African publics have consistently vocalized suppo for democratic governance, pitting them in many cases against an old guard political class that has maintained power through repressive and coercive tactics. Many African leaders have adjusted their tactics to more effectively control their populations, pining them against African publics who have channeled their discontentment into protests ranging from organized campaigns to spontaneous riots. As prodemocracy advocates compete with autocrats for the upper hand, many are looking outside their borders for new sources of suppo and assistance. (U) Africa Experiencing Growing Number of Mass Protests (T ) We assess that African protest campaigns' growth in size and cohesion during the past decade has increased their ability to push for democratic change. Protest rates in sub-Saharan Africa have increased sharply during the past decade, mirroring a global trend of expanding protest activity across regions, government types, and levels of development. (U) This assessment was prepared under the auspices of tile National Imelligence Officer (NIO) far Africa. It was drafted by the National Imel/igence Councillll DECLASSIFIED by DNI HAINES on May