NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE COUNCIL July ICA - -A Iran's Hardline Regime in Transition Presents Diversified Challenges for the United States (U) Tltis Imelligence Community Assessment was prepared under the auspices of the National Imelligence Officer (NIO) far Iran. It was drafted by the National Imel/igence Coun DECLASSIFIED by DNI HAINES on March (U) Key Takeaway The IC assesses that Iran's regime will endure through as a new generation of conseIVative and hard.line leaders looks to bolster their role in shaping Iran's domestic political, economic, and foreign policy. Iran's path most likely will be nrrbulent domestically and defiant on the international stage as the regime defends its strategic goals while seeking relief from sanctions that have isolated Tehran and kept the economy persistently weak. To retain its hold on power, the regime probably will rely on its loyal and responsive security forces and use repressive tactics to control the public and a disjointed political opposition. The consolidation of power mainly among Iran's hard.line elites is likely to pose new challenges for US interests. We assess that Tehran will sustain its adversarial posnrre toward the United States in the region and would be reticent toward any efforts at rapprochement with Washington. The Iranian regime almost certainly will remain committed to developing robust civilian nuclear and advanced missile capabilities. Key Judgment : The IC assesses that increased political competition among Iranian conservatives and hardliners and the resulting power consolidation and emergence of younger elites through will widen rifts between the regime and the public, further eroding the regime's claims to popular legitimacy- We assess that the regime will counter domestic challengers, including with violence, and that it will endure as it transitions to a new cohort of leaders. Key Judgment : The IC assesses that Iran's economy will continue to underperform through , raising the prospect of cycles of unrest and repressive crackdowns. The economy's health will be one of the key metrics in the Iranian public's evaluation of the Islamic Republic's success in governing. We have moderate confidence in this judgment because of uncertainties about the future of sanctions relief from a potential Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) nuclear deal, oil prices, and the willingness of foreign partners to invest in Iran. We assess that the Iranian public will continue to place greater emphasis on economic opportunities and conditions over political motivations in its evaluation of the regime. Key Judgment : We assess that power consolidation by hardliners will ensure that Iran remains committed to its core policy objectives, holding steady the prospect of confrontation with the United States. Iran probably would remain wary of US-backed initiatives even following a potential international nuclear deal. During the next five years, Iran's foreign and security policies probably will deviate little from the Supreme Leader's guidance, the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps (IRGC) will remain an unchallenged policy implementer, and Iran most likely will advance its civilian nuclear, ballistic missile, and advanced conventional weapons capabilities. Barring a substantial commitment of US military forces in the region, Tehran probably will view the United States as a waning power that is pivoting to Asia and hesitant to employ military power against Iran. Ii I