DECLASSIFIED by DNI Haines on January [ ii ] (U) Scope Note This IC-coordinated National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) addresses the implications of the COVID- pandemic for US economic and national security interests through , in response to a Presidential tasking. This NIE examines four key areas of implications: economics, human security, governance, and geopolitics. We concentrated on implications that we judged are more likely to persist through the next five years, rather than the more ephemeral impacts of the pandemic. Our baseline assumptions about the trajectory of the pandemic during the next five years, presented below, provided the foundation for our judgments on the broader implications of the pandemic. This paper does not draw out every potential impact of COVID- nor does it examine conditions or trends unrelated to the pandemic, but instead focuses on the implications of the pandemic that are likely to affect US national security interests. This NIE was written prior to Russia s invasion of Ukraine in February. The conflict s effects on global economic stability and human security, in particular, reinforce the conclusions of this NIE that the COVID- pandemic has weakened resilience, leaving many governments and populations less able to adapt to economic and geopolitical shocks. (U) Key Gaps and Uncertainties Our judgments are based on a wide body of open-source reporting and research, including outreach to outside experts, about the effects of the pandemic thus far, across a range of sectors and societal dimensions, coupled with all-source intelligence reporting on the plans and intentions of foreign actors. We acknowledge considerable uncertainty in projecting the longer-term impacts of the ongoing pandemic, given shifting projections on the pace of economic recovery, and the resilience of countries and societies as they manage the persistent spread of the virus. We also have uncertainties surrounding the trajectory of the pandemic itself, including the frequency and severity of emerging variants; government and public responses to surges; the development and deployment of more effective therapeutics; and the speed and comprehensiveness of global vaccine deployment. Finally, we judge that the pandemic could have unforeseen implications not covered herein, owing to the strain that the pandemic may continue to place on governments and populations globally. (U) Assumptions We assume that the virus that causes COVID- will continue to circulate globally during the next five years because of imperfect and waning immunity following both vaccination and infection, as well as gaps in vaccination coverage due to hesitancy and constraints on supplies and dispersal. We assume that the virus will continue to cause mostly asymptomatic or mild illness in vaccinated individuals and susceptible children, and combined with improved therapeutics, this will decrease instances of severe disease. Finally, we assume that reshoring and improving supply chain resiliency and declining globalization probably will result in structurally higher inflation during the five years of this assessment than has been true for the decades before the pandemic. Although outside the scope of this assessment, we assume that global commodity price increases caused by Russia s invasion of Ukraine in February will aggravate existing inflationary trends but will not be sustained through . [ ] (U) Many advanced economies ability to issue debt in local currency, combined with the long maturities of their bonds, has allowed them to sustain higher debt burdens and use debt to finance future expenses related to recovery and healthcare, so long as there is political support. Countries with excessive debt levels, including Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, are at greater risk of credit stress if political support for financing their deficits falters or if the European Central Bank stops buying their government bonds. (U ) Labor Market Disruptions To Persist (U) Labor-force disruptions engendered by the pandemic are hastening trends toward automation and remote work, which we assess will more negatively affect the incomes and employment of some workers outside the knowledge sectors in advanced economies. (U) The COVID- pandemic has accelerated the expansion of e-commerce, online education, digital health, and remote work, widening gaps in digital literacy and excluding poorer populations from educational and employment opportunities in the global digital economy, according to the World Economic Forum and a US investment bank. Many companies have deployed automation and artificial intelligence in warehouses, grocery stores, call centers, and manufacturing plants to reduce workplace density and cope with surges in demand. (U) The expansion of automation and remote work options probably are increasing productivity, especially in large companies, but the effects of efficiency-focused productivity gains and accelerated digitalization could dampen employment, eliminate middle-skill jobs, and constrain consumption over time. (U) At of the end of , labor market recovery was fastest in high-income countries, which constitute only about one-fifth of the global labor force, whereas labor forces in low- and middle- income countries have been experiencing a much slower recovery, according to the International Labor Organization. (U) Employment losses from the pandemic have disproportionately affected women s job security, reversing, at least for now, the trend toward women s greater participation in the global workforce. According to a private-sector study, the COVID- pandemic has increased the unequal burden of childcare carried by women in every region, leading more women than men to leave the labor market during the pandemic. The analysis suggests that if this added burden lasts, for example, because of new outbreaks that reduce the availability of childcare, more women will leave the labor market permanently. (U) Before the pandemic, according to the study, women worldwide already spent an average of six hours more than men per week on unpaid childcare, and this time commitment grew to almost eight additional hours per week during the pandemic. (U) Women worldwide are overrepresented in the service sector, where closures of face-to-face businesses have disproportionately affected women s employment. In addition, closure rates of female-owned businesses were higher in every region than those of male-owned businesses during the first half of , with the differences particularly pronounced in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, according to analysis by World Bank researchers. Women in OECD countries will not catch up to their pre-pandemic projected rates of participation until , according to the private- sector study. [ ] for national security. Australia, Brazil, France, Germany, India, and Japan have begun encouraging domestic producers of critical medical supplies to reduce dependence on foreign supply chains by reshoring or diversifying to other foreign sources and maintaining stockpiles, (U ) Many global firms also are seeking alternatives to reliance on China, often with the support and encouragement of home governments (U ) Continued Costs to Human Security (U ) Key Judgment : The COVID- pandemic and its economic fallout are likely to continue to have harmful effects for human security the protection of individuals from threats to their well-being during the next five years, while stimulating some improvements in global preparedness for future pandemics. We expect that human well-being will continue to suffer throughout the next five years because of the economic damage and other indirect effects of the pandemic, particularly in developing countries. (U ) We assess that the pandemic is likely to continue to take a steep toll on human development and aggravate inequalities, with the greatest and most enduring effects likely to be in less-developed countries and within already-vulnerable populations. (U) Depending on the speed of countries recovery from the pandemic, the UNDP estimates that to million additional people could suffer extreme poverty in , compounding the approximately million expected, based on pre-COVID- trends. (U) In the past years, major epidemics have significantly increased income inequality within countries during the five years following the event, according to IMF research. Given the severity of this pandemic, inequality may increase more so than with previous epidemics and recessions, according to the same research. (U) Pandemic-related school closures have caused major losses in education for students worldwide, probably resulting in long-term human capital losses. Unequal losses have deepened inequalities between and within countries and may cause longer-term disparities. Children in lower-income countries missed three to four times as many days in school as those in wealthy countries, while children from less-educated families had reduced access to remote schooling, according to surveys in South Asia. (U ) School closures in at least five African countries Ghana, Kenya, Namibia, Uganda, and Zimbabwe have fueled spikes in teenage pregnancies that are likely to increase future demographic pressures because early childbearing typically results in more children. Many new teenaged mothers probably will not return to school, limiting their economic opportunities and potentially reducing GDP in Sub-Saharan Africa by an estimated percent during the next decade, judging from information from US NGOs, the WHO, and a South African academic study. [ ] highest point since , most likely because of harvest setbacks, increased demand, and supply chain disruptions, many of which were pandemic- related. Even if relatively short-lived, price increases are likely to contribute to further erosion of savings and assets for vulnerable households, reducing resilience to future nutritional challenges. (U) Even the short-term acute food insecurity resulting from the pandemic is likely to have long- term effects. Notably, malnutrition in children impairs cognitive and physical development, weakening human capital formation and economic growth, according to academic research. (U ) Some Drivers of International Migration Exacerbated, Government Restrictions Likely To Endure (U ) We assess that COVID- is likely to continue intensifying some core drivers of international migration during the next five years, probably increasing future international flows and altering traditional migration patterns. The acute economic fallout and travel restrictions brought on by COVID- contributed to a reduction in global migration flows in . (U ) The economic shocks from the pandemic and its accelerating impact on socioeconomic inequality have the potential to contribute to new large-scale migration and displacement as well as alter conventional migration patterns. (U) The COVID- pandemic worsened already poor governance and underlying socioeconomic conditions in parts of Central America and the Caribbean, including food insecurity, lack of job opportunities, and crime and violence, which are likely to remain drivers of US-bound migration from the region for years to come. (U ) At the same time, we expect some governments may seek to harden the restrictive travel and migration policies put in place during the pandemic, amid rising xenophobia, potentially reducing flows in some places or resulting in new, more disruptive migration patterns. Many countries imposed cumbersome conditions for entry, including proof of vaccination or recent negative COVID- test results. Others, including some already struggling to manage high levels of migration, may take steps to enact harsher policies toward migrants and asylum seekers and portray them as public health measures. (U ) Setbacks for Global Health Likely To Reverberate for Years (U) We expect that COVID- and its aftershocks will continue to strain health systems and disease control during the next five years and potentially longer, especially in less-developed countries, degrading overall population health and constraining countries ability to respond to emerging infectious diseases. The direct threat of the pandemic to global health will lessen considerably during the next two years as vaccination coverage and recovery from natural infection rise, but its indirect effects are likely to continue to strain health systems, which may in turn increase the chance that other infectious diseases are able to spread. Developing countries in particular are likely to face more prolonged health effects from the pandemic because of slower COVID- vaccine rollouts and less resilient health systems, which in some cases already struggled to manage pre-pandemic burdens of disease. [ ] (U) National Intelligence Council (U) The National Intelligence Council manages the Intelligence Community s estimative process, incorporating the best available expertise inside and outside the government. It reports to the Director of National Intelligence in their capacity as head of the US Intelligence Community and speaks authoritatively on substantive issues for the Community as a whole.